Educators outreach meeting, December 13, 2018, 17:00 UTC

Attendees:

* Brian Kardell
* Sergey Rubanov
* Sarah Groff Hennigh-Palermo
* Johannes Weber
* Vaidehi Joshi

Agenda & notes

* New attendee introductions
* Johannes's idea for improving TC39 documentation
    * JW: Publishing some bullet points and links for what's going on in TC39. You'd reach a lot more people; reading all the agendas and everything is too much information. It's too many bullet points. My idea was doing an interview or a form, for what's been going on in the last week/month, what's important to go. Make an RSS feed or some way to subscribe, to get their interests and push regular updates rather than asking people to pull. Doing that, you would reach a lot of people and inform them about the current process.
    * VJ: That reminds me of something in the Rails community. There is a "this week in Rails" newsletter explaining contributions, bug fixes, features, short to read. I don't know who puts it together, but since it's just a few things each week, and not too much to read… we could have "this week in TC39" or "this month in TC39", but somebody curates, and lets people know things, lowering the barrier to entry, so you don't have to find the agenda, sift through it, etc. I would subscribe to that, since I rely on these meetings and don't have the energy to figure out what I need to know.
    * BK: A lot of the people you're gonna reach--there are multiple layers here. A lot of people won't know that there is a pipeline for proposals, or roughly what it is. I do a thing with W3C, trying to do similar things with standards--we get 30 seconds with people, on video, what is the elevator pitch for your feature. Anyone can afford 30 seconds to watch something; an article takes 5 minutes. Do you think there'd be an advantage to make a really basic feed for, here are the proposals, since you won't recognize them or care about them.
    * JW: So we could make a really short video, to understand the advantages, disadvantages, right?
    * BK: And have a curated collection of these elevator pitches, that can be pushed, like through Twitter or whatever, every week or every month. That kind of thing can get a lot of eyeballs.
    * SGP: Oftentimes I find out what's going on because people get mad about it, and then I dig into the GitHub threads. We could have a weekly proposal, and go into things.
    * JW: I run a newsletter called ESNext News. I could give that a try, of setting up the structure, based on ESNext News, and going out with this, some time next year. I'd be motivated to start this. I'll set this up during the Christmas holidays and get back to all of you about it.
    * General nods for everyone 
    * VJ: Do we have a consolidated place for TC39 education outreach? Maybe we should start doing that.
    * DE: tc39.github.io/beta? Maybe we could put the things there
    * VJ: Yeah
* Topic: Pipeline Operator
    * DE: The idea is you can have a bunch of functions and chain them together.. <Dan explains proposal - 'you can do functional programming and make it cleaner'>.  There are a number of different proposals how you could do this.
	:: the thing that is before the double colon gets passed in as the 'this' value. One disadvantage is that people who like functional don't like this, they don't understand it. If you are trying to get away from classes you probably want to get away from 'this' as well.  
    * The issue of multiple arguments — necessity of arrow function; partial application with ? OR smart pipeline with #

DE: It’s been added to Babel and  lot of people have been asking about getting the pipeline but in committee there is a lot of pushback

SG: You mean they're not convinced if it worth it at all?

BK: It seems like having a real thing will help close the loop, and get feedback. This will lower the bar and get people to try it. But, how is feedback being collected on things? Is understanding that and making it more optimal part of the goal here?

DE: We don’t really know how to collect feedback I am hoping we can figure it out together. There was object spread, for instance. Now we are on class fields. We got a lot of coarse grained feedback through Babel. But then TC39 made changes and they were not implemented in Babel. So it is not clear how to get feedback through changes. ANd the feedback is hard to know what to do with — or incompatible changes.

BK: A lot of conversations in standards committees goes into the ergonomics: Will developers get this? Will they find it intuitive? That is a pretty coarse signal, but theory people can theorize about that all day long, but the best way is to have that real data, and that leads to a signal that you can get

SG: I feel like the lack of clarity has to do with who's on TC39. I tend to write non-class-based code. The idea that pipeline would add more complexity than the class features is surprising. Should figure out who to talk with to work through this.

BK: It seems like a lot of the conversation is about what people will get or not get, or like vs not like. But if we have a way to show with real data, that would really be the key.

DE: How do we collect that feedback?

BK: We need to figure out how to do the science.

SG: With pipeline, another question is, how useful are analogous features. Lodash and Rambda have related functions; is the committee taking this into account?

DE: The committee is aware of this, but what should the takeaway be?

SG: Well, if people are using something in a particular way, then doesn't that mean something?

DE: There still may be theoretical arguments that are considered to trump it, and people who used the existing thing could be seen as biased.

BK: If we could somehow capture how much mindshare proposals have, seeing what libraries people are using, etc

SG: Maybe we need to make free workshops, separate out groups, etc

SG: Let's try to come back next meeting with ideas about how to get signals out of the noise of feedback.

AI: Make an issue in the (pipeline?) Github repo to discuss the question of signal and noise in feedback 

* Proposal review
    * Pipeline operator [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pipeline-operator/](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pipeline-operator/) 
        * Four possible options
            * :: bind operator [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-bind-operator](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-bind-operator) 
            * "Smart" pipeline [https://github.com/js-choi/proposal-smart-pipelines/](https://github.com/js-choi/proposal-smart-pipelines/) 
            * "F#" pipeline [https://github.com/valtech-nyc/proposal-fsharp-pipelines/blob/master/README.md](https://github.com/valtech-nyc/proposal-fsharp-pipelines/blob/master/README.md) 
            * (or not add the feature)
        * Feedback-based approach [https://babeljs.io/blog/2018/07/19/whats-happening-with-the-pipeline-proposal](https://babeljs.io/blog/2018/07/19/whats-happening-with-the-pipeline-proposal) 
        * Documentation and Babel transforms in progress
        * Discussion topics
            * How should we analyze this proposal?
            * How does it relate to functional programming?
            * What patterns does it enable?
            * Is it teachable?
    * Standard library in JavaScript
        * Built-in modules? [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-javascript-standard-library/](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-javascript-standard-library/) 
        * What should be in them?
        * Infrastructure
            * [https://github.com/domenic/import-maps](https://github.com/domenic/import-maps) also covers bare specifiers
        * Names/bikeshedding
            * Prefix for module specifiers
                * "std:foo", "@std/foo"
        * Versioning
            * The web doesn't do versions
        * Process
            * How can we get more involvement in standards processes?
        * Cross-environment pain points
            * Does the standard library need to be similar across the Web vs Node.js?
            * What are the pain points people have when learning how to write code that works in multiple places?
        * Is the current lack of much standard library good or bad for learning?
* Documentation/error messages efforts
    * Better error messages [https://github.com/codehag/js-better-errors](https://github.com/codehag/js-better-errors) 
    * MDN documentation
        * Ongoing efforts for decorators, class fields, async iterators, BigInt, pipeline, optional chaining
        * VJ: I'm working with Yehuda on decorators documentation. Because of the nature of that proposal, there are so many layers. The proposal itself focuses on things that are abstract. There's a lot of upfront investment that I need to do on what the problem is that decorators are trying to solve. Of all the things that you need to understand the proposal, which ones are important, and distilling it. So I need to learn about why the proposal is necessary. That part has required a little bit up-front investment than I thought.
        * DE: Yeah, it took me years to understand why decorators were needed; Yehuda had this intuition way ahead in the future compared to me.
        * VJ: I'm developing smaller scripts to see why, given the prototype system, and where classes came in, how classes without decorators give these restrictions. But I don't want to write a huge novel with all the history; I want to distill the important part.
        * SG: I'm working on BigInt; luckily, Dan gave a talk about it recently. We have advanced documentation and beginning documentation. For the beginning documentation, it doesn't need to explain everything; things can be separated out into separate places and not explain everything.
        * BK: you kind of want the elevator pitch to start with.
        * SG: There's a theory of learning styles, that some people are global learners and some people are concrete learners, so there's not one right way. Trying to document it both ways can be helpful for people.
        * DE: I'd be interested in following up with you about your learning process, since I've been thinking about simplifying the proposal somewhat, based on what Yehuda told me about your learning process.
        * VJ: Yes, simplifying the proposal would be great. My process involved learning all the details about the JavaScript object model. This is a very big proposal.
        * BK: Do you think there's an analogy with classes, in that way, because classes are a nicer way to write, but they don't change the way anything works under the hood, so they have some maybe interesting choices, surprising bits, if you had to write the documentation for classes, would you find yourself in a similar boat? Maybe look at the documentation for classes, evaluate it yourself, and see if it's the level you're going for
        * Is working with MDN going well? 
            * SG: A short how-to guide would be great; there's a lot to read to learn how to get started.
            * VJ: That would be really helpful. I've never contributed to MDN
* Meeting planning
    * January 10, 17:00 UTC?
    * Should we invite anyone else?
    * Organizational idea: What if we tried to be associated with the Node+JS foundation, rather than Ecma? (maybe this doesn't matter to anyone…)
    * Does anyone else want to sign up to be co-organizer with Dan? Responsibilities:
        * Propose initial agenda
        * Send out reminder email
        * Add/remove people in calendar invite
        * Post notes after meeting
        * Take notes during meetings or run the meetings (switch off)
    * BK: Include something in this document about how the notes, meetings are organized; it was hard for me coming in
