Note, this meeting is not an official TC39 function, but rather an unofficial call to discuss TC39-related issues

Attendees:
	Daniel Ehrenberg

	Tracy Lee

	Axel Rauschmayer

	Marius Schulz

	Sarah Groff Hennigh-Palermo

	Wolfram Kriesing

	Kyle Simpson

	...

Draft Agenda: (please insert things you'd like to discuss here)

* Introduction and purpose of this group (15 min)
    * Purpose of this group
        * Discuss developer pain points -- later on the agenda
        * Discuss current TC39 proposals
        * Discuss how to provide feedback to TC39
* TC39 proposal review (20 min)
    * BigInt [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-bigint/](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-bigint/) 
        * Oddity
            * No implicit coercion from Number to BigInt => TypeError thrown
            * Concatenating a BigInt and a String is valid — possibly confusing?
        * How can we discuss features in the future?
        * APIs: be consistent – either always throw or never
        * Understanding BigInts: use later, won’t be used by beginners
            * Treat it like any other form of numeric literal (binary, hex, …)
        * Possibly (and negatively): bloggers may tell people to always use BigInt
        * Official TC39 messaging should be that "X is the new Y" is not the recommended way to learn new JavaScript features
        * How can design rationales be communicated with the community?
            * Readme of proposals
            * Possibly: explicitly managed rationale documents
        * How to get better input?
            * Change stage process: for stage 2(?), require educational material to be written. Coordinate between bloggers and proposal authors/champions
    * Class features [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-fields](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-fields) [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-methods](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-methods) [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators)
        * Syntax for private fields (this.#field) has been highly controversial, but is required (for technical reasons) to achieve true privacy
        * (Axel) I’d prefer not to have private static
            * Location of state is in same object as method, can’t use `this`
        * Should we reconsider syntax? [https://gist.github.com/rauschma/a4729faa65b30a6fda46a5799016458a](https://gist.github.com/rauschma/a4729faa65b30a6fda46a5799016458a) 
            * Motivation 1: make private fields available to FP-style code
            * Motivation 2: enable an alternative to private static
            * Reasons against: more complexity, better to stay with max-min design maxim.
    * Other Stage 3 features (if time allows)
        * Global
    * Optional Chaining Operator (status update)
    * Nullish Coalescing Operator (status update)
    * (if you are interested in discussing a particular feature, insert it here)
* JS developer pain points (10 min)
    * Error messages
    * Console semantics
    * Module syntax (export vs default export)
    * try/catch ergonomics (forces to use let, catching specific errors is hard) 
    * (Think about further items to add)
* Next steps for this group (15 min)
    * Was this discussion interesting/useful for you?
    * How should we work with TC39 going forward?
    * Interested in a follow-on meeting?
        * Strong interest in future discussions/meetings of this group
        * This informal type of meeting is fine
        * Frequency: about once a month, 1h meeting
        * Date and time agreed upon via Doodle (created by Daniel)

## Notes sent to committee

Dan Ehrenberg, Wolfram Kriesing, Marius Schulz, Kyle "getify" Simpson, Sarah Groff Hennigh-Palermo, Tracy Lee and Axel Rauschmayer met to discuss TC39 proposals and educator involvement in the TC39 process.

At a meta level, we discussed what could be done to improve education and community engagement. Kyle suggested that we ask for educational materials (perhaps multiple) to be produced as part of the TC39 proposal process. Dan suggested that this be done before Stage 3, as it's harder to make changes after Stage 3 and proposals might ship at that point. There seemed to be general interest in collaborating on these materials. We also discussed alignment with people writing about JavaScript features. It's unfortunate when people make claims like, "arrow is the new function", when they both continue to have utility; if we can develop official rationale documents and coordinate more with people writing about JavaScript, it could be a benefit.

We discussed a couple technical tradeoffs for TC39 proposals; we didn't aim to come to strong consensus about these questions, but rather to hear various points of view from the group, and think about how to approach these problems in the future.

- For BigInt, we discussed the details of operator overloading and coercions, how some operations throw (1n + 2) and others don't (1n + "2"). Sarah expressed concern about the errors, including inconsistency compared to past JavaScript versions which avoid throwing. Several people said that the way that Symbol throws on implicit coercion to String is surprising and feels inconsistent. Kyle argued that it's better to err on the side of throwing, to reduce programmer bugs.

- For private class features, we discussed Axel Rauschmayer's private name declarations proposal, which might include a change in the syntax for private field/method declarations ([https://gist.github.com/rauschma/a4729faa65b30a6fda46a5799016458a](https://gist.github.com/rauschma/a4729faa65b30a6fda46a5799016458a)). Axel would rather not have the private static feature, and instead support this declaration form, which subsumes those use cases and permits functional programming styles. Kyle expressed hesitation about including private outside of classes, preferring to limit its scope. Marius suggested starting with a "max min" approach, which would be more like the current proposal. Wolfram raised the issue of redundancy of `private #`.

The group is well aware that this meeting is not an official part of TC39, but is content to meet anyway and discuss these issues. All attendees were interested in continuing to meet monthly, for an hour, with a new Doodle each month to accommodate attendees' complex schedules.
