Educators outreach meeting, March 14th, 2019, 17:00 UTC

Attendees:

* TJ Monserrat
* Brian Kardell
* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Vaidehi Joshi
* Max Korteskyi
* Tara Z. Maniscic
* Sharon DoOrio
* Wolfram Kriesing

Agenda & notes

* Documentation efforts
    * How's it going?
        * VJ: I was supposed to work on decorators documentation, which is on hold, because of the status. But I found many other deficiencies in MDN, which could be helpful for explaining how objects work.
* Feature discussions
    * Decorators next steps:
        * Based on shared feedback from the three browsers, we may need to take a step back and rethink; may take some more time. [Notes](https://github.com/tc39/tc39-notes/blob/master/es9/2019-01/jan-30.md#decorators-for-stage-3)
        * Wanted: What decorator use cases are valuable for you? [Issue](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/231)
        * Is the Stage 2 decorators proposal confusing? 
        * Vague idea: Make decorators "more static", and start with feature parity with TypeScript/Babel "legacy" decorators.
        * Sincere apologies for the delay in getting this to a stable state.
        * New proposal link (very early): [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/blob/static/README.md](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/blob/static/README.md) 
        * Notes:
            * MK: It would make sense for user-defined and internal decorators to be distinguished by syntax.
            * DE: They have the same naming convention on purpose, so it's like you're using the same thing
            * TM: How are they imported?
            * DE: Well, they could be exposed by a built-in module, but I was thinking that they'd be on the global scope.
            * ™: This could make linters go crazy, as they wouldn't know where they come from. So linters would need a list of built-in decorators so that it won't show up that it's an undefined decorator.
            * DE: I was hoping that linters could keep track of it as the set of built-in decorators increases over time
            * ™: I get a lint error when I use fetch, as it doesn't know about the window object. So this problem would also occur with built-in decorators.
            * VJ: Could you describe the major differences between this proposal and the previous one?
            * DE: This proposal tries to accomplish the same goals, but in a different way, based on composing built-in decorators. It is less capable, more like the original decorators proposal
            * WK: In Python, decorators are simple functions. Why is this more complex?
            * DE: This proposal tries to do a lot more, but it tries to keep it easy to program with @wrap, which is more like python decorators
            * BK: In the status, you could have a short synopsis of how custom decorators are based on built-in decorators, and explain the outline
            * SD: It would be good to start with built-in decorators, since we all thought that things like @logged were built-in decorators at first.
            * BK: Maybe we can work on some text together, but it seems like trying to say 'too much' upfront on either end (built in or examples of what you could create) will yield confusion. It seems best to use the very early intro to say something like "this proposal frames custom decorators in terms of how they can be achieved via the following initial built-in decorators:  * * *". 
            * VJ: It would make sense to explain the tools first, and then how you can use them. 
            * ™: You could start with @wrap and @register, and then examples on how to use them. I'm curious about how it's hard from the previous proposal, how the previous proposal was difficult to implement. That's a good way to make a statement that it's a better proposal.
            * BK: Will this break people's code, to have less capabilities?
            * DE: Not really, it's more about things people weren't using yet, in the Stage 2 proposal
            * BK: That happens; I think the community will be interested in having the value.
    * Top-level await
        * Blocks execution of modules that import the module that's awaiting
        * [Explainer](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await/blob/e4b85036b17bff433eb8521860a28effb8447b46/README.md)
        * Current plan: "siblings" in module import graph can be initialized in parallel
        * Notes: <dan presents>
            * DE: … some good things came out of JSKongress, this proposal looks like:
            * import await { output } from "./awaiting.mjs";
            * BK: Rich Harris raised the concern that TLA would make things implicitly async and cause issues. It seems like the right thing
            * DE: Note, another concern from Rich that we resolved was, if you have multiple `import await` statements, they run in parallel, not sequentially.
            * ™: I have a project where I export a firebase name, while it's still starting up. I'm wondering if the web component should show up or not show up while it's waiting for the firebase to load. If the import await is going to wait up for the result of having the Promise inside the module, it will not run anything below.
            * DE: Rich raised the concern about TLA being an attractive nuisance, that it could cause people to await more than they should. Do you see this as being a risk?
            * ™: Well, maybe this is analogous to loading a big file, which already takes a long time, and you have to avoid stopping executing the whole.
            * BK: Nothing changes about your capability, it's more how you express it. The primary question is, if we give you this sugar that is potentially too sweet and easy to read and write, does it actually potentially disincentivize you properly thinking through parallelization or asynchronicity opportunities?
    * WeakRefs
        * [API draft](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/issues/55#issuecomment-444513178)
        * [Spec text draft](https://weakrefs.netlify.com)
        * Motivated largely by WebAssembly
        * Finalizer callbacks can't access the object that died (unlike in Java)

