January 17, 19:00 UTC

Attendees

* Richard Feldman
* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Divya Sasidhar
* Jordan Harband
* Justin Fagnani

Agenda and notes

* Meta: Working mode (5m)
    * We've been publishing notes, sharing with proposal champions and committee
    * Should we make joint recommendations to TC39 about things we agree on?
    * Should we make a specific effort to review proposals just before Stage 3?
        * No quorum today!
* [Decorators](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators) for Stage 3
    * Recent changes: Some renamings, restrictions on private/decorator interaction
        * JF: We hit several cases where we need "fake fields"--we are changing field declarations to accessors, and we need to use the initializer. And we need finalizers . We want to be able to run code at the initializer location, but it's not exactly an initializer, since we're writing to an . We're using an initializer as, kind of, an instance finalizer.
        * DE: You can get this with a `kind: hook, start() { }` item
        * YK: Sounds like the use case you have in mind uses every part of our design
        * JF: Yes. In one case, where we only needed a finisher, we wanted to take an element, erase it, and just run a finisher.
        * DE: Yes, you can do that now with kind: hook, finish
        * JF: OK, sounds good
        * DE: Did this mitigate the set vs define issues?
        * JF: As much as a decorator could. Then there ends up being debate on our team: If we decorate a field, should we keep it as close as possible to define semantics (since users expect it) or should we keep it aligned with accessor semantics (which can change super)
        * YK: What's an example of a concrete decision on the basis of that question?
        * JF: If a superclass has a field, and you want to enable observation of a field, you could have a subclass with a decorator to observe it. We're making a change to go closer to field semantics, and giving another way to augment superclass fields, since now the semantics are based on shadowing.
        * YK: I made a proposal for a new "declare" keyword for just this use case, of not clobbering but annotating.
    * Big open question: Should the `elements` array be available to class decorators? ([https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/192](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/192) , [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/191](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/191) )
        * High-level question: Should class decorators be able to rewrite the whole class, or just add fields and methods, and then be able to mutate the constructor?
        * No equivalent in Babel/TS decorators, but can be useful in working with define-based fields and private
        * Cost of elements array generation at compile time
            * JF: I was concerned about elements because I saw a huge amount of metadata loaded into the compiled output. This may be temporary, because of transpilers, but maybe it would be an issue long-term. The only thing we do with class decorators is something like register the class, so we don't really need this. Hygienically, I think it's better to decorate the fields than to decorate the whole class.
            * YK: The use case is some kind of test/debugging which isn't built in, locking down the whole class, etc. It wouldn't be good to have to write something before each element.
            * JH: React has a number of lifecycle methods which they have deprecated; it would be great to use a class decorator to migrate, and it'd be cumbersome to put it on each method that you're migrating away from.
            * JF: private fields seem like the hard part
            * DE: There's also fields
            * JF: It's a shame that you can't introspect fields, when you can introspect methods
            * YK: We were thinking of leaving that as a decorator feature. We kind of lost the plot there--we made a bunch of decisions that made sense, but ultimately we’ve lost the ability for class decorators to work with fields.
            * DE: So the big 
    * DE: Any more feedback on decorators?
        * JM: I'm still digesting the changes vs v1. The majority of the use cases I've seen in React are pretty much just auto-bind. Shouldn't we consider auto-bind as a special thing?
        * DE: Yeah, I think we should do that, actually; it can probably be more efficient. Do you see efficiency problems with the field arrow function pattern?
        * JM: Yeah, a closure per instance?!
        * JH: It causes lots of problems to use this auto-bound method pattern, e.g., for testing.
        * JM: if there are specific cases where access to elements are valuable, and we can bifurcate that case ,maybe we're trying to solve two problems at the same time that would be more useful to solve independently
        * YK: Dan has some ideas for that as a follow-on proposal
        * JF: Maybe we should try to say that, if Babel can resolve some metadata on the decorator itself, it's like Java annotations, it can decide whether to emit the metadata
        * JH: The concerns expressed in the past were about exposing the private fields, in any way.
        * DE: There are different kinds of performance concerns
        * JF: But at least there's the overhead of making that Array
        * DE: Yes, that's true.
        * JH: We've talked about reflection methods for public fields. Would that face the same overhead?
        * DE: I'm not sure which proposal you're thinking of
    * YK: Should we have elements as an opt-in?
        * DE: Yeah, I think it'd be a good follow-on proposal. The only hard part is the syntax opt-in, and 
        * JH: 
* Optional chaining https://github.com/tc39/proposal-optional-chaining
* Standard library [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-javascript-standard-library](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-javascript-standard-library) (10m)
    * Should JavaScript and the web have a larger standard library?
        * How should we work together with the JS library and framework community on this?
        * RF: Lodash and moment seem like good starting point. How many end users are downloading a copy of lodash since that's what authors want?
        * JM: If you manage to download only one copy of lodash in a webpack bundle, I'll be impressed
        * JM: Do you see this as being in contrast with layered APIs?
        * DE: I see this as all part of the same thing; we're just using different words
        * JM: I just learned recently about how import-maps do the remapping and polyfilling. But do we want it to look all like polyfills all the time?
        * JF: It's generic and goes both ways. You can use the built-in specifier, and you don't need to rewrite the import.
        * JH: JavaScript already has a standard library, but it's small. The thing keeping the standard library small is that we're trying to keep things correct. The lodash/moment discussion doesn't relate to built-in modules.
* Next meeting date: February 21, 19:00 UTC (works?)
