September 19, 2019, 20:00 Europe/Madrid

Attendees:

* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Fred Kleuver
* Justin Fagnani
* Michel Weststrate
* Lee Byron

Agenda and Notes:
 
* Status updates
	* Ongoing built-in modules controversy: Hesitation by Google on built-in modules; continued push by Apple
	* Optional chaining and nullish coalescing: Rapidly being implemented and shipping
	* Class fields and private fields and methods: Implementations becoming broadly available, but controversy remains
	Temporal: Adding timezone API, approaching polyfill npm launch
	* Static decorators: Remain controversial; Babel implementation making progress
+ Proposals to discuss
	* Records and tuples: For Stage 1 https://github.com/rricard/proposal-const-value-types
		* DE: [Reviewing the README]
		* DE: Deeply immutable “arrays” and “objects”.  Can only deeply contain primitives and records/tuples. Use these for things that will never change, don’t have identity (a la objects). Otherwise work just like arrays/objects, can use normal accessor syntax, JSON.stringify works, etc etc. Cannot be used in WeakMap as key, no concept of identity. This was based on previous feedback that it would be difficult to guarantee correctness across different platforms, etc. Effectively, they act like primitives in this way.
		* FK: Can have getters?
		* DE: No, must be immutable values
		* ?: Functions?
		* DE: They can’t be allowed to close over scope. Interesting research area (deeply immutable functions)
		* LB: Not fully understood in functional languages
		* JF: This couldn't short-circuit dirty-checking in practice
		* LB: Deep immutability will be a stumbling block in practice, when people end up needing to *refer* to a mutable thing. They don't expect DOM nodes to be deeply compared. Allowing that would limit what we want to do, like moving things between web workers. Maybe we could have an explicit reference type as an explicit bridge between the reference world and the value world.
		* JF: There are a couple interesting use cases, e.g., often I need compound map keys. I have some series of objects… I need basically compound identity. You could make a tuple that contains a list of reference types, and you get a compound map key.
		* JF: Template literals are really amazing. The literal part is kind of like a value type itself. A reference value would let you have an immutable tree with mutable pointers out of it.
		* DE: How can we evaluate whether we should allow mutable references?
		* LB: 
			1. Let's list out motivating use cases, and examine which use cases are affected by this, decision, one way or the other. Current explainer is sparse in use cases.
			2. Let's look at other languages. Clojure is an interesting reference, bridging the world.
		* LB: For workers (requiring deep immutability), there's an interesting overlap in these problems: React would like to move work to a worker, but it cannot due to the overhead of copying the data. React needs to point to callbacks and DOM nodes inside of this tree. I could see React Core migrating their internal data structures to records and tuples, but they would need a way to do this referencing. If they didn't have this, they could keep an array of integers, etc, but not very pretty.
		* JF: Maybe we could use a technique similar to Wasm
		* DE: Well, WeakRefs only works for objects.
		* FK: maybe we could store an opaque reference
		* JF: References can help with cross-worker GC. If a reference is sent to a worker and reachable in the worker, it would be kept alive in the sending thread…
		* LB: What about deep updates?
		* DE: We took that out, but I like your idea `{ ...x, y.z.w: a }`
		* LB: `const x1 = #{ a: { b: [ "Q" ] } }; const x2 = #{ ...x1, a.b[0]: "P" };`
		* MW: what about multiple subsequent updates, can those be made performant enough, or would we need temporal immutability like in ImmutableJS/Immer. 
		* DE/LB: That has to be researched in more detail in later stages, but since VMs can implement different strategies transparently to the user, VMs will hopefully be able to optimize this. Especially if their is no branchin / dynanism
		* MW: What about JSON.parse? For parsing fetch payloads etc this would be really useful
		* DE: We had it first, then removed it, but everybody asks about it, so probably we should add it, as JSON.const or something. 
		* LB: What about repeating # on every level of nesting? The current proposal is inconsistent in that regard
		* (Answered by DE)
	+ Explicit Resource Management https://github.com/tc39/proposal-explicit-resource-management stage 2
		+ Skipped due to time constraints
	- Iterator Helpers  stage 2
		- [proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-iterator-helpers)
		- DE: encourages people to put more on the prototype.Would have preferred that it was a built-in module. It’s at stage 2 so it’s pretty far along.
		* JF: I think it’s a huge win in terms of ergonomics, huge win.
		* DE: if you have an array, and you want to use these you have to call Symbol.Iterator explicitly; is this okay?
		* LB: had originally suggested that you could explicitly create a new Iterator; rather than using the symbol.
		* JF: there’s a difference between an iterator and an iterable:
If you called an iterator on an array, is that iterable, or an iterator?
		* DE: while most are both, you can consume an iterable with an iterator.
		* LB: I think the comparison you might draw is a for of loop:
Past spec specifically addressed whether these were reusable, the current spec does not.
Once you start consuming iterators, they’re not reusable.
		* DE: is this going to be too confusing of a mental model, thinking about how iterators get exhausted.

	* Mixins
		* Justin looking for co-champion, additional proposals to cover Protocols use-cases.
	* Non-JS module types
		* Does importer need to specify expected type: https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/839
		* Avoiding extraneous microtasks with values that may or may not be async.
