Purpose: Discuss involvement of frameworks and libraries in proposals

Time/Date: October 18th, 2018, 18:00 UTC

Attendees 

Justin Ridgewell

Adam Bradley

Richard Feldman

Daniel Ehrenberg

Timmy Willison

Ben Lesh

Divya Sasidharan

Evan You

Jordan Harband

Manu Mtz-Almeida

Michel Weststrate

Justin Fagnani

Gray Norton

Igor Minar

Misko Hevery

### Agenda

Please edit below if you have anything more you want to discuss:

* Introductions (if necessary)
* How should we interact with TC39 and other standards bodies?
    * Note, this group is officially unofficial; that could change in the future though
    * Dan's suggestion: Discuss current and possible future TC39 proposals and surface the feedback/suggestions to TC39, so they can take it into account
    * (Insert more suggestions here for what you'd like to accomplish)
* Review of proposals
    * Decorators [http://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators](http://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators)
        * Igor: I like decorators before the export keyword
        * Manu: Are you thinking about decorating the export keyword in the future?
        * Igor: One of the issues with decorating exports, is you don’t want to change the static nature of the module system. We don’t have any non-breaking use cases now.
        * Manu: I also like before export. It just looks better
        * Michel: Same. Aesthetics. But shipping anything is more important.
        * Justin F: Just because existing code bases use the before ordering, they also use a compiler so the compiler could fix it. Class fields are unusable without decorators. We need em.
        * Adam: I don’t care, I just want them.
        * Igor: Existing uses outside javascript, this would look weird.
        * DE: Decorators after export might ship with less fighting in TC39.
        * Justin F: I think this is an extremely easy codemod to run. It really doesn’t matter.
        * Igor: Transforming the developer expectations, and documentation, that’ll take forever.
        * Ben: Agreed.
        * Manu: People won’t expect this change.
        * JRL: This is a static bug. It’ll throw immediately
        * Ben: I don’t understand why JS would want to be different than other languages.
        * Justin F: Javascript doesn’t have to look like Java.
        * DE: Hearing from you, it sounds like the majority would like before ordering.
        * JRL: At the last meeting, no one besides RB wanted to argue for before ordering.
        * Michel: I’m in favor of just shipping.
        * Justin F: Does there exist an argument that’ll convince everyone. If not, we can’t really get consensus. Unless we go with a different voting model.
    * Temporal [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-temporal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-temporal)
        * Specific interest: accessing raw IANA timezone database info directly from the browser instead of application authors having to ship it in their bundles (e.g. [Moment.js Timezone](https://momentjs.com/timezone/), 25K for the full timezone database).
        * Richard: Moment.js is sooooo big. You have to ship the timezone database to use it. Elm has this as a core library. It won’t be exposed in a First Class way so you can pass it around. It would be great for us if we could have TimeZone values.
        * JH: I would like to see that. But we discussed, and we think it could be an addon in a later proposal.
        * DE: if something gets viewed as ugly, then it’ll make it slower to get through. There’s no universal format we could use that I know of. It sounds like the ask here is just to be able to model Elm’s Timezone code on top of Temporal. Can you open an issue on the proposal?
    * Class field proposals, current concerns are noted here: [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-fields/issues/151](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-fields/issues/151) (Michel)
        * DE: One big difference is that this uses DefineProperty and not Set semantics. That means it won’t hit setters. This was changed about 2 years ago, but I guess no one noticed in the community.
        * Michel: I think neither Babel or Typescript implemented Define semantics, so I definitely didn’t notice.
        * DE: Why didn't anyone notice with Babel 6, which had spec mode already use defineProperty semantics?
        * JRL: Lots of people used loose mode in Babel 6; it was often on my default
        * Justin F: We have both a decorators and without-decorators. If you just use class-fields, it shadows our metaprogramming. There’s no way to really do this well.
        * Michel: It’s undetectable from the libraries’ perspective
        * Manu: I don’t know why we changed. I don’t like it.
        * DE: The hope was that define would be less painful in the future. You don’t have to worry if your superclass has a setter that you forgot about.
        * Michel: It’s more consistent, but it hurts all the boilerplate that we’ve already written.
        * Evan: I think Define makes more sense. The parent may have a setter, but the class that I’m writing, I want to just have a known shape.
        * Justin F: There are footguns either way.
        * Evan: If I wanted to trigger a setter, I would have to know about it. And then I would use it in the constructor.
        * JH: What if React wanted to deprecate a field and they define a setter that logs.
        * Michel: If you couldn’t redeclare, if that was a typeerror, then it wouldn’t be an issue.
        * DE: Interesting. I think we can take this back to the committee.
    * Optional Chaining?
    * (Igor) The pipeline operator
* JS pain points/language feature wishlist
    * Even frameworks designed to parallelize work can’t get a performance boost from web workers in practice, due to serialization/deserialization overhead. SharedArrayBuffer doesn’t fix this because application authors don’t want to work with APIs built on array buffers. Is there a world where we can move significant work off the main thread without the serialization costs outweighing the parallelization benefits?
    * In practice we all ship compiled JS in UTF-8 and receive UTF-8 encoded JSON from servers. Then we convert those strings from UTF-8 to [UTF-16 (or UCS-2)](https://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-encoding) because that’s what [DOMString](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DOMString) requires. This is a performance penalty we all pay, and what we get for it is a client-side string that isn’t quite the same as what the server sent. Is there a possible future where we can avoid this performance cost and potential source of bugs by taking UTF-8 encoded strings we get from the server and working with them (especially putting them into DOMStrings) in their original UTF-8 encoding?
    * Module initialization issues. We don't have very many ways to ensure that all of the resources that a module depends on are fetched and initialized before the module body evaluates. Top-level await is a very dangerous solution for this. Embedders can add new module types, but language level features for async initialization, or import processors could help immensely.
        * See: [https://gist.github.com/justinfagnani/d26ba99aec5ffc02264907512c082622](https://gist.github.com/justinfagnani/d26ba99aec5ffc02264907512c082622) for some thoughts on how to address some things.

    * (Add your suggestions here)
* Future of this group
    * Meet monthly, at this time, for an hour?
        * Interest in continuing monthly in roughly this format
    * Any suggestions for how to run it, who to invite, etc?
        * Ensure that there is good background information presented clearly well before the meeting

----

## Set vs Define follow-up

Follow-up letter from Dan to the group on the Set/Define topic:

Hi everyone,

Thanks for coming to the first JavaScript standards/frameworks outreach meeting. I hope it was useful and informative for you, and I'd be happy to hear any more of your thoughts about how this effort should go in the future.

In the meeting, we discussed whether public field declarations in subclasses should trigger setters in superclasses. Folks from Ionic, MobX and Polymer argued that the setters should be triggered, and Evan from Vue argued that they should not be. Historically, in TC39, Facebook championed the no-setter semantics and TypeScript approved this.

For next steps:

- Comments on this question are welcome at https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-fields/issues/151 (find links to background in the thread)
- There's a proposed partial mitigation using decorators, at https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/44

Part of the complexity is that the proposal has been at Stage 3 for more than a year. Stage 3 indicates that the design phase is largely complete and further changes are motivated by implementation feedback and bugs. Before reaching Stage 3, we discussed both the Babel/TS compatibility and metaprogramming issues at length, before coming to consensus in committee on the no-setters conclusion.

The stability is used to convince browsers to put in the effort to implement features, and even ship them sometimes. For example, V8 turned on this particular feature by default in master, with the semantics of not invoking superclass setters, some hours before our meeting.

In the future, let's focus on proposals at Stage 2 or earlier, when it's more actionable to make significant changes.

Thanks,
Dan
