February 21, 19:00 UTC

Attendees

* Brian Kardell
* Justin Ridgewell
* Yehuda Katz
* Michel Weststrate
* Fred Kleuver
* Jordan Harband
* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Justin Ridgewell
* Ben Lesh
* Justin Fagnani


Agenda and notes

* Meta
    * Any suggestions for change in format/priorities?
    * Feel free to invite anyone else in your teams alongside you or in place, if you'd like.
    * Can someone help take notes?
* TC39 status
    * Private symbols were [discussed](https://github.com/tc39/tc39-notes/blob/master/es9/2019-01/jan-31.md#private-symbols-for-stage-1), but not adopted. Public and private fields, and private methods and accessors, are continuing to move ahead without changes
        * FK: Why throw a TypeError and not return undefined when there's no private field defined?
        * JR: The delegates did not want to allow setting a private name after the definition of an object, and only during definition and not later on, at some arbitrary method. Returning undefined from getting a private field is kind of an odd case--it's using object syntax, but it's not object scoped properties, so this is trying to give you an earlier error.
        * DE: The idea was to be more like an internal slot, which would throw if it didn't exist
        * YK: This also doesn’t mean you should change all your weakmaps to private state.
        * FK: This is more about use with Proxy; if you returned undefined, you wouldn't get unexpected behavior. If you access it, you wouldn't get an exception thrown.
        * YK: The design philosophy here is to throw exceptions for the error cases, just like when constructing a class without new()
    * Decorators next steps:
        * Based on shared feedback from the three browsers, we may need to take a step back and rethink; may take some more time. [Notes](https://github.com/tc39/tc39-notes/blob/master/es9/2019-01/jan-30.md#decorators-for-stage-3)
        * Wanted: What decorator use cases are valuable for you? [Issue](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/231)
        * Is the Stage 2 decorators proposal confusing? 
        * Vague idea: Make decorators "more static", and start with feature parity with TypeScript/Babel "legacy" decorators.
        * Sincere apologies for the delay in getting this to a stable state.
        * DE: Strong feedback from Chrome and Safari that the current proposal is not acceptable. Working on a pretty significant revision to make them more static. Firefox and Safari think these are too complicated and too hard to use.
        * DE: Want to get feedback on usecases, so we can include it in the more static version of decorators.
        * JF: I've been talking a lot with the V8 people. The complicated API concern was much less important than the startup metaprogramming cost concern. I would argue that it's less complicated and more powerful, but the biggest concern is the startup cost concern. So far, there may be more positive concerns on the new idea.
        * YK: People might say, with Stage 1 decorators, I know what Object.defineProperty has, whereas now there are more knobs. I think there's some sense that that's an accurate assessment.
        * JH: The current design was arrived at to meet all the usecases. Feels like the bulk is there to meet use cases. If the important part of the objection is performance, …(something)
        * DE: The perf problem is due to classes with different shapes. This doesn’t work well with how implementation bytecode works. Bytecode wants a lot of consistency to make bytecode run faster. None of the usecases i’ve seen use parameters to change the shape of the class dynamic. The new proposal is to try to make everything static.
        * YK: something…
        * DE: If we start with a restricted set, we can make it a little easier to optimize and add things later to it.
        * JH: But they’ll just do the dynamic things without the decorators?
        * YK: The decorators allow for too much dynamic action on every run. We want to make it so that I declare that this will change a field to a accessor pair, and that’s locked in.
        * JH: Does the new design describe the changes and lets the implementation make the changes?
        * DE: Yes.
        * JR: Does this operate with the built in decorators reserved syntax?
        * DE: Yes, it sort of subsumes it--you could make those built-in decorators. I'd love to get in touch with others who are interested in that are interested in this path.
        * New proposal link (very very early): [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/blob/static/README.md](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/blob/static/README.md) 
        * DE: The biggest piece of feedback I heard was, an MVP feature is that you need to be able to replace the class, so I'm thinking of adding that back into the MVP.
        * JF: I’d be interested in what people are doing with replacing the class. I don’t understand it yet.
        * YK: They’re opposed to mixins, even though that’s what their decorator is doing.
        * DE: You can both replace the prototype and mix in a mixin without replacing the class itself.
        * JF: @connect replaces it with another unrelated class. But I feel like they should just be passing in a class into a function call. The others I’ve seen is the mixins proposal, and we should be pursuing that.
        * DE: The previous proposal was ...something. This makes it so that we can extend it more in the future. Previously we had to shove all these things into the decorator descriptor object.
        * YK: The implementers are agreeing with our usecases, but they have suggestions for how to improve the perf.
        * JH: It's a lot of change to take in
        * JF: I think there was a lot of pent up opposition, and it didn't become clear until it got closer to actually advancing.
        * MW: Should we split it up, like property decorators first, class decorators later?
        * DE: That's the intention with the MVP which starts with legacy decorator features
* Proposals for discussion
    * WeakRefs
        * [API draft](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/issues/55#issuecomment-444513178)
        * [Spec text draft](https://weakrefs.netlify.com)
        * Motivated largely by WebAssembly
        * Finalizer callbacks can't access the object that died (unlike in Java)
        * Would this be useful for your framework?
            * MW: Yes, I see many cases where it would be useful, e.g., related to caching more things. I would have to write down more details, but if you want to cache something until it disappears, and not have that stick around too long.
            * YK: Why don't WeakMaps work?
            * DE: This is more about the value being weak than the key
            * MW: And sometimes there would be a circularity, if you used a WeakMap, that would point back to the key
            * JR: WeakRefs allow you to both weakly hold it and still be able to strongly iterate it later on.
            * FK: And non-object keys
            * BK: There seems to be some division in TC39? AWB seems to not love it?
            * YK: AWB pointed out that this could let you rely on GC timing. If you use WeakRefs, you may use object lifetime when you should be more explicitly disposing of it. But another example is, you have a pointer into Wasm memory, and you want to free the Wasm memory later when it gets cleaned up.
            * DE: Is it OK that WeakRefs are "post-mortem", and you can't access the object from the finalizer callback?
            * MW: I don't think it'll be a problem
            * FK: It would be convenient to have the object, but it shouldn't be fatal.

* (Igor) The pipeline operator [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pipeline-operator/](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pipeline-operator/) 
    * Four possible options
        * :: bind operator [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-bind-operator](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-bind-operator) 
        * "Smart" pipeline [https://github.com/js-choi/proposal-smart-pipelines/](https://github.com/js-choi/proposal-smart-pipelines/) 
        * "F#" pipeline [https://github.com/valtech-nyc/proposal-fsharp-pipelines/blob/master/README.md](https://github.com/valtech-nyc/proposal-fsharp-pipelines/blob/master/README.md) 
        * (or not add the feature)
    * Feedback-based approach [https://babeljs.io/blog/2018/07/19/whats-happening-with-the-pipeline-proposal](https://babeljs.io/blog/2018/07/19/whats-happening-with-the-pipeline-proposal) 
    * BL: I'm curious about what the committee has been saying about this proposal
    * FK: Is it possible to parameterize this, passing colon-separated parameters
    * BL: With the simple proposal, you would do that using a higher order function; with the smart pipeline, you provide the argument with a #
    * JF: This overlaps a lot with partial application/currying.
    * YK: There's a conflict between partial application and 
    * JF: it seems unfortunate, since smart pipeline seems like partial application, but only in pipeline.
    * BL: The simplest proposal is something you could have first ,but then later add the other things. 
    * DE: There was an objection to that becuase having to look for a # in the middle of an expression to understand what kind of expression it is.
    * BL: The smart pipeline proposal disallows higher order function?
    * DE: You’d have to have a parenthesis
    * YK: I’d be interested in a mvp proposal that could get most of it without doing all these later issues?
    * DE: I don't see how, since there's this garden path argument, for why the parens should be required for a complex expression, though I'm not convinced of that.
    * BL: in my world, the F# pipeline is what we want.
    * JF: Yeah, I agree. It solves the problem. But
    * BL: In Ramda, you can do this with a higher order function. F# pipeline would just work with all of that. But using a placeholder would require refactoring
    * (simple pipeline is [https://babeljs.io/repl/build/master#?babili=false&browsers=&build=&builtIns=false&spec=false&loose=false&code_lz=GYVwdgxgLglg9mABAQwCaoBQDofIE4DmAzgJSIDeAUIongKZQh5IYAeZAvAHwXU20MmSfMSz1UICHQwYiIALYAaRDE4858xAGoVy9gG4-AX0NHKlAIyI-AHx5pMAJmUBmZQBYStnhARE4ADZ0WAFwBEA&debug=false&forceAllTransforms=false&shippedProposals=false&circleciRepo=&evaluate=true&fileSize=false&timeTravel=false&sourceType=module&lineWrap=true&presets=stage-1&prettier=false&targets=&version=7.3.3](https://babeljs.io/repl/build/master#?babili=false&browsers=&build=&builtIns=false&spec=false&loose=false&code_lz=GYVwdgxgLglg9mABAQwCaoBQDofIE4DmAzgJSIDeAUIongKZQh5IYAeZAvAHwXU20MmSfMSz1UICHQwYiIALYAaRDE4858xAGoVy9gG4-AX0NHKlAIyI-AHx5pMAJmUBmZQBYStnhARE4ADZ0WAFwBEA&debug=false&forceAllTransforms=false&shippedProposals=false&circleciRepo=&evaluate=true&fileSize=false&timeTravel=false&sourceType=module&lineWrap=true&presets=stage-1&prettier=false&targets=&version=7.3.3))
    * JH: In react I have a lot of higher order components. Some of these HOCs take arguments as well. What I would like is to convert this into a pipeline. Since some of them take arguments, it would be nice if I didn’t have to write an arrow function around each one that takes arguments.
    * YK: …
    * JH: The HOCs would probably be rewritten to fit into whatever the pipeline operator does.
    * BL: If you have a higher order function, you have to wrap it in an additional parenthesis in smart pipeline. This would be a common pattern for RxJS
    * YK: Without deciding what’s idiomatic, you would find it unfortunate to make single arg functions require extra syntax to accommodate smart pipeline.
    * DE: Kevin Smiths skinny arrow Exlixir style is also "this would work great in this particular case". There’s a lot of things that each particular proposal is good at that the others aren’t.
    * YK: It seems like there are a lot of options for the syntax. Not enough of the conversation is focused on what we could ship soon.
    * MW: Which is the easiest to learn? Which adds the least to the language? I think the smart pipeline is the more complicated when you read over the examples.
    * BL: Either of these would work, as long as we get rid of the forced parens from smart pipeline. I would prefer whichever we could land the soonest. I don't think we should go with the thin arrow pipeline just because of lodash, given that it wasn't designed for it.
    * YK: Seems like F# would work for the 80/20 rule, though the ecosystem would need to adapt to it a bit. Do people agree with that?
    * MW, BL: I agree
* Topic to add next month: Cancellation
