
## 2020-03-19 19:00 UTC

### Attendees

* Daniel Ehrenberg (DE)
* Fred Kleuver
* Steve Hicks
* Chris Garett
* Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
* Justin Ridgewell
* Kristen Hewell Garrett
* Richard Feldman
* Rick Button
* Rob Eisenberg
* Robin Ricard
* Steve Hicks
* Tierney Cyren
* Justin Fagnani
* Brian Kardell (late)
* Shu-yu Guo (SYG)

### Agenda and notes

## Explicit Resource Management

* [Proposal explainer](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-explicit-resource-management): Disposes a resource at the end of the scope
* Like `with:` in Python, or `try () { }` in Java, or RAII in C++
* Two possible forms under discussion:
    * try using (resource) { }
    * using resource;
    * (both?)
* How would these be for your framework?
* Discussion:
    * DE: (presents slides)
    * Rob E: How does async disposal actually function? What will be awaiting that at the end of the block?
    *  DE: Async disposal would be, if you use the await, it calls the asyncDispose callback, and falls back to dispose, think like a try/finally block, in the finally block you would have an "await" on the dispose method.
    * Rob E: I missed how it was valid only an async context.
    * DE: Any other thoughts?
    * Robin R: this would be useful for bloomberg, which implements a custom solution for something like this, would be happy to give more use-cases for this. Overall, we’re excited about this and would be happy to help.
    * DE: That’s great to hear.
    * Fred K:  I could see it being useful in node.js side, e.g. when working with files. I can’t see it being used on the web.
    * Robin R: I don’t see any good use case for web.
    * Steve H: Closure has a lot of legacy usage of disposal for a class. I can imagine a way to fit that in, but it would be a paradigm shift.
    * Justin R: async resource map library that Mozilla publishes loads a bunch of ??? into WASM, and they need to call dispose explicitly, that’ll be a nice use-case.
    * Tierney C: I’ve ended up working with a lot of folks that aren’t JS developers but work with node, this would remove some of the foot-gun-ness of async and promises. 
    * DE: Now I remember all those discussions re: node and promises leaking memory.
    * Tierney C: I’m not sure. It’s hard for people to write promises in a memory-safe way.
    * Steve H: We’ve been looking at cancellation APIs, it would be nice to have a way to automatically disconnect it.
    * DE: I think this is a little orthogonal to cancellation APIs. @rbuckton is also championing cancellation APIs.
    * Steve H: Not directly connected, if you listen for cancellation, you want to able to unlisten.
    * DE: Do you want to unlisten in such a quick way?
    * SH: whenever you’re done with what you’re doing it’s uncancellable.
    * DE: You do a bunch of awaiting inside of the block, and when done exit the block and unlisten.
    * SH: Yes.
    * DE: That’s an interesting use case. We could dig the semantic details, or move on to realms.

## Realms

* [Proposal explainer](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-realms)
* API has narrowed down a bit, and integration with  modules and HTML outlined
* Existential question: [Does this meet web developer needs?](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-realms/issues/238#issuecomment-597858133) If so, how? (In more detail than we have in the notes from the past meeting)
    * Would it be reasonable to use Workers (maybe with postMessage + SharedArrayBuffer + WeakRefs? Or even Records and Tuples??) asynchronously instead  of Realms synchronously? 
* Discussion: 
    * DE: (presents explainer)
    * FK: It would be useful for Node.JS to simulate iframes, or for tooling, to pretend you are working in an iframe. Those things are hard to do with Node.JS. I don’t know that it adds capability, but makes things easy that are hard to do.
    * DE: Node has a "vm" module that supports this capability, but is not available in other settings. Why is this better in the “vm” module?
    * FK: I would have to think about that.
    * DE: people like SYG have raised this issue, pointing out how Node already has this functionality. 
    * John-David D: At salesforce we are dealing with isolation and creating our own realm with our own mechanism, having it standardized would be fantastic.
    * SH: We have several teams at google that embed code, ads, maps api that need to isolate code. As it stands right now, It will still need working around.
    * DE: do you polyfill this at Salesforce?
    * JDD: The realms-shim is discontinued. It could be a partial solution, but not the official shim anymore. That fell to the side because of exploits.
    *  DE: How does your own relate to this proposal?
    * JDD: It creates a realm via a detached iframe. The membrane allows for objects created in the sandbox to be exposed outside the sandbox.
    * DE: Would this realm policy enforce the same security policies?
    * JDD: I would hope. For us, we need to have a DOM and access to a DOM, I don’t know if Realms will support that. Our current mechanism for sandbox allows us to swap out, for example in node we use "vm", on a browser we use a detached iframe. All we need is the ability to create a secure global, and have a reference to that.
    * Ujjwal: On the node side of things, it will be useful to have a standardized API, the node API is based heavily on the context api, and takes a significant amount of effort to add functionality. Also, I don’t know if it is a big problem, but a lot of C++ will go away if we move all of this to JavaScript land.
    * SYG: The use cases I’m most interested in, it’s good to separate general use cases for isolation. When we talk about sandboxes and realms, usually people come up with examples of how sandboxed execution is useful, that is true. Specifically I am interested in the sync use-case. Is a sync API useful here? One of the main points as a motivation that the realms API uses is that Workers are nearly impossible to use for some use cases. I would like to understand that better, not that "is there a use for sandboxed execution".
    * JDD: great. We’re using a synchronous sandbox that allows ecosystem code to run without async. So you can use jQuery and access the DOM via the sandbox. 
    * SYG: You want access, not to a separate DOM, but the DOM of the outer page?
    * JDD: Yes, for us, that’s somewhat separate from the realm because we’ll use some proxies and descriptors to ???. The fact that we’re using a detached iframe is an implementation detail. We’re just passing over references over a membraned proxy which also allows us to have distortions in place. The sync bit pertains to the maturity of the ecosystem. People should be able to sandbox regular code.
    * SYG: The current proposal as I understand it, there are no security guarantees.
    * DE: The realm proposal itself doesn’t create a sandbox, whether it is possible to create a "secure" sandbox in JavaScript is controversial. I’m interested in use cases that aren’t security.
    * SYG: I haven’t heard how important it is to get Realms over iframes? What are the cons of the status quo?
    * JDD: the case is undersupported in browsers. In Chrome, you can’t have debug statements in a detached iframe. In Safari, detached iframe don’t have access to variables created in the global context and don't get updated. Because this is a very niche use-case, it’s not supported well uniformly, so it feels brittle. Having a standard object will give us a stronger foundation. We just need a low-level construct that we can use to implement sandboxes. 
    * DE: I’m wondering, further about the Worker case. There are some new things coming, SAB, WeakRef is coming. Would it be possible to move to an async pattern for some of these? Could you spin up a worker where you want to create a new environment? 
    * JRL: AMP uses a webworker currently, we spec’d an implementation for this and it’s horrible. We need sync access to the DOM. This is ?? for the whole ecosystem. So anything which needs async access to the DOM is very difficult. We can use this to give sync access without allowing them to poison the DOM.
    * SYG: Isn’t that the point of web apis saying that it should be async? That you want to make them hard to write.
    * JRL: I can’t force every library to switch to async. If you are trying to do normal DOM operations it is terrible.  We don't have the giant carrot or stick to make people do these things.
    * SYG: If realms were to exist, AMP would want to migrate it’s existing use of workers to Realms?
    * JRL: Yes! We’d have to analyse the security boundaries, but we’d like to use a sync realm. It’s still a secure area without shared builtins.
    * JF: Would this be better if you had sync messaging with the worker?
    * JRL: It would still be difficult to implement DOM apis but it would be a lot easier to do. One of the ideas we had was to use SAB to block the thread during a read. Of course that makes performance terrible. If we could get actual sync access that would be better but would be re-implementing the entire DOM api.
    * JF: One of the use-cases SYG asked about was about templating systems which are string-based need to eval stuff and they need to be synchronous but have the same security concerns. Since these are user-provided strings, they want to be able to eval synchronously expressions inside a realm. 
    * SYG: When people say the word "security" are they meaning the same invariant? Justin specifically said that no access by default to the creator realm, do other folks mean different things?
    *  DE: the realm proposal doesn’t provide any proper isolation, for example, you can throw an error uncaught and it’ll trigger onerror on the parent.
    *  JRL: For AMP no, the owner document is privileged. We can’t allow the realm to access the parent directly.
    *  DE: If you have a function the realm that throws, it can trigger window.onerror to happen. There are tons of subtle interaction things that will happen. Is that a problem?
    * JF: In cases I’m familiar with, no. If you have user-generated content with the DOM, so if users can access external realms and poison prototypes, it’s bad. Throwing an exception is okay, we just need to isolate the globals.
    * DE: How do you protect the code running inside the Realm? It is easy to pass in a reference to any object, and then get to the globals from inside the Relam. Salesforce is talking about membrane based security, hygiene for things passed into the Realm? How do you prevent this? With workers you get this for free.
    * SYG: Another way to phrase that question is that in order to use this for a worker, you have to re-implement a lot of stuff. This isn’t actually secure by itself. This makes it less compelling to me.
    * JF: If you have to implement a membrane for message passing or security, they seem equivalent.
    * SYG: The sync messaging case you discussed is useful though, we could discuss it separately.
    * DE: Is sync messaging being discussed somewhere public?
    * SYG: Let’s not derail, we can come back after the end of this discussion.
    * JF: DE, to your point about security, most of the use cases seem to imply a desire for security, but security is hard to implement.
    * DE: Like server side rendering.
    *  JF: Server side rendering is a compelling use case.
    * DE: When you say VM context, you mean node VM module?
    * JF: Yes
    * DE: This has a similar problem of security boundaries. It’s not the same kind of security that you get with the web-origin model.
    * RBU: On the topic of SSR, in most cases, SSR happens for your own code. So the idea would be to isolate client-side code from server-side code. The expectation is that the observer wouldn’t know that they’re in a realm. There’s two kinds of running untrusted code. User-provided untrusted code is bad, both otherwise untrusted code is good.
    * SYG: For those use cases, is the status quo insufficient? Is moving code out of Node the main advantage?
    * JF: There is also a performance advantage. You can presumably fork them.
    * DE: No, I don’t know how that would work. As far as I know it provides a subset of the capabilities.
    * SYG: If it is standardized, the velocity will be lower.
    * Ujjwal: The context API is there. I get your point that the standardized API will be slower to change. We currently have to make changes to the VM module often.
    * DE: Does anyone have any further comments?
    * (silence)

## Module attributes

* Considering going for Stage 2 with
    * import json from "./foo.json" with type: "json"
* Changes since previously:
    * Considered `as "json"`, now considering going back (reason: generality)
    * Specification would require support for JSON modules with this syntax in all environments
        * Environments could still support other kinds of JSON modules
    * We'd work harder to coordinate attributes and type values across environments, with a registry
    * Both "check"- and "interpret"-style attributes expected
* Thoughts?
* Discussion:
    * DE: (introduces proposal)
    * JF: I was at the meeting where this was first presented. My concern is that there was an objection to the idea that hosts would reject an import if the attributes were not correct. There was a desire for these to be metadata, but not be "checks". Is that still the temperature of the room?
    * DE: All environments have to accept type: json, but if you don’t specify the type, the host is still allowed to import a json module. I know that this remains controversial.
    * JF: I feel like we need this, so I’m for whatever that gets consensus.
    * Rob E: Is this the foundation for CSS and HTML modules?
    * DE: Yes. The proposed semantics for CSS modules are a single detached stylesheet.
    * Steve H: VMs would have to accept the json type. That doesn’t apply to old VMs. It seems that you need to have some way to know if it doesn’t work.
    * DE: That is a good question. There is also no way to figure out if async/await works. At some point I figured we would ignore the unrecognized attribute keys.
    * Steve H: I agree that it is okay to be strict upfront. You mentioned async-await, you can check that with eval, but this is worth considering.
    * JF: There is going to be tooling outside of the VM that wants to take care of these attributes, I would love a world where a module works with or without a bundler.
    * DE: Exactly. So the transition path I picture is to have bundlers interpret JSON and other modules and then move to native imports later. So this could be a good way to deal with said bundlers.
    * JF: Beyond type, other keys might be useful for tools.
    * DE: The other part of this is that we would have a registry that would exist in the proposal repo, that lists keys and their intended values. There is a lot of concern around ecosystem fracturing around this tool usage.
    * There is already ecosystem fracturing, tools already use these loaders specified. 
    * Rob E: We more or less have to force a bundler on a downstream app builder using a reusable web component, you need to use HTML and CSS and need to get it in some way. That forces a specific bundler on the end user.
    * JF: This is what Dan said, this should be compiled out before going out to npm. 
    * DE: But we don’t want to lock people into particular tools. Not rule out tool-only things, but communicate via this registry, and coordinate on one set of things.
    * JF: But you will be having the same problems with values. How strict do you want this to be? This you *have* to throw? If there’s an invalid value? 
    * DE: Browsers would be completely strict and not permit any of those. Tools would hopefully also be strict. That is part of the feedback I am trying to gather.
    * Steve H: I think my two-cents is that looking back at ESM, that was a giant mess. It created a lot of compatibility issues with bundlers. I wonder how to avoid such a situation.
    * JF: I would worry about things that are hints to tools, that otherwise the module could work in a browser, except for the fact that it has an unknown module attribute.
    * DE: If we ignore them, we can’t give them semantics later.

## Decorators

* I (Dan) have been a bit negligent about following up here, setting up a call. Does someone (or a subgroup) want to take on this task?
