
## 2020-06-18 20:00 Europe/Madrid

### Attendees

* Rick Button (RBU)
* Robin Ricard (RRD)
* Leo Balter (LBR)
* Daniel Ehrenberg (DE)
* Minko Gechev
* Steve Hicks (SH)
* Rob Eisenberg (RHE)
* Justin Ridgewell
* Caridy Patiño (CP)
* Brian Kardell (BKL)
* Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
* Michael Ficarra (MF)
* Marvin Hagemeister
* Brian Kardell

### Agenda and notes

## June 2020 TC39 Recap

* [Record and Tuple](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple), asking for Stage 2 in July
    * Equality semantics: deep structural comparison, with #[-0] === #[0]
        * RBU: *gives context*
        * RBU: negative and positive zero are equal but NaNs are also equal. According to us, this is the best compromise. Equal zeroes help retain reflexivity of records and tuples that have NaNs. Any comments?
        * SH: this sounds like a good compromise, but ???
        * DE: *explains the three equality options* 
        * SH: this is the same as set and map keys, so it's perfect
        * DE: Any other thoughts?  

    * Scheme for references to objects: Symbols as WeakMap keys
        * SH: this may cause problems with polyfills 
        * DE: this isn’t polyfillable, like various other features.
        * RRD: you can rely on 3rd party modules for this.
        * DE: does your concern relate to feature-testing? 
        * SH: my concern is changing existing builtins in a way that can't be polyfilled, but that's less concerning given that we're also allowing record/tuple keys at the same time
        * RRD: WeakMaps would be nice to express the relationship between Records and Tuples and Objects. If this is ???. It could be something like Clojurescript that ???.
        * DE: this could make records and tuples to be far less significant, so we were hoping that weakmaps would be a bridge. Does it mitigate the concern?
        * BKL: the idea is that the value in the tuple is the (primitive) symbol, rather than the object? And that you wind up with a nice way to create something that is _explciity_ dereferencable ?
        * RRD: Yes, everything inside them should be a primitive. Therefore, since Symbols are primitives, this works really well.
        * RBU: you can use numbers, but you need to manually roll memory management, so that’s why WeakMaps are so important.
        * BKL: I think that is pretty nice.  It seemed strange until I understood it but now i actually really like it.
* [Module Attributes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-module-attributes)[Import conditions for Stage 2](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-module-attributes), reached Stage 2
    * import obj from "./module.json" if { type: "json" };
        * RHE: I don’t quite understand the use-cases of that.
        * DE: ??? Imagine an integrity attribute that takes a hash. The type:json is similar. Some people were concerned with the fact that mixing these semantically is weird (doesn't make sense to make an extra copy)
        * RHE: that does make sense. I’m just saying that practically I wouldn’t have a use-case here without the transform part. What’s the use of a conditional without the transform?
        * JHD: Can you explain the transform?
        * DE: json modules are like… a trivial module type. This holds value because it’s a more generalized structure. JSON modules make sense for all environments.
        * RHE: thanks, I appreciate the clarification.
        * DE: it would be clearer once we have a different repo for it.
        * RHE: perfect.
    * Import conditions may only be used for checks; future proposal may add attributes which change module interpretation
* [Built in Modules](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-built-in-modules), Stage 1 Update
    * Apple is proposing an imperative API to polyfill built-in modules
        * LH: the challenges that the champions are working on, one of them is all the stuff around polyfilling. Example. Add or patch a built-in module. There are also virtualizability concerns. Providing a way to run untrusted modules is one of the challenges. Another challenge is to deal with … if built-in modules shipped today, many would want to use them. We are working on APIs on exposing modules and freezing them to it could be done while polyfilling.
        * DE: fetching is a big part, not the execution. It needs to happen on the background, but scripts run sync so it’s complicated.
        * RHE: does this actually run over import maps?
        * LH: I think it’s unclear. We need to discuss this with WICG, who spec import map. It’s not decided though and I’m not 100% sure. We need to ensure that they work well together.
        * USA: what about Node?
        * LH: deno can pick up the same semantics. Environments like Node can choose how to deal with this.
        * JRL: The current exports() api does sync exporting of the namespace, which essentially means that I have to ship my polyfill code unconditionally. If builtin module isn't there, I sync export the polyfill, and if it is, I just wasted all those bytes on the polyfill. Should we be exporting promises for polyfills instead? Then I can async fetch the polyfill if needed. Makes it like a TLA and later modules wait on that TLA.
        * DE: ???
        * LH: I will talk to 
        * SH: Some have expressed [concern](https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/421#issuecomment-561705979) over builtin modules, bifurcating the world between pre-2020 (globals) and post-2020 (builtin modules)
        * JHD: possible to work backward, expose (e.g.) Map as a module, but now need to the two versions in sync
        * MH: I have a question about polyfilling. Can we just use an async import statement with a try catch?
        * LH: you can’t use import with try-catch.
* [Temporal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-temporal), released cookbook and TypeScript .d.ts, polyfill exists on npm
    * USA: we're currently working on different ways of accepting feedback - currently the way you can give feedback is through the issue tracker, but we are working on alternate ways - more active, surveys and things so that we can go back to the committee with an API with some more feedback/battletested.  There were some requests to be a little slow in making dramatic changes - we've tried to take that into account and give people enough time.  We plan to have a more stable API in July and go for stage advancement beyond that,
    * DE: Some people have asked why not just make a library - why make a standard, with the idea that libraries can be more volatile.  I think libraries also need stability, I'd like to hear thoughts
    * SH: We tried this and had some issues integrating with builds and things (commonJS modules, in particular).. Part of what brought me into the conversation about builtin and polyfills was this.
    * DE: Currently you have to import it, we did this because we don't want people to assume
    * SH: Yes, but even once you have agreement, then this has to exist as a polyfill for some years to come and that gets tricky - it seems that having it as a built in module would be good
    * DE: We originally proposed this should be a built in module, but also at the time perhaps I was pushing too hard and built in modules weren't there and it confused the discussions, maybe.
    * JHD: I think that globals are the easiest to polyfill.  I want people to be able to adopt it easily and frictionlessly, and I don't think that anything that goes as built in modules will have those qualities for some time.
    * USA: It is implemented as an ESM module, we are just creating the commonjs via rollup.
    * SH: Child dependencies I mean
    * USA: I guess, I see - we can look into that
    * DE: Could you open an issue SH?
    * SH: Sure, I'll follow up offline.  

* [Realms](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-realms/blob/master/explainer.md) further articulating use cases
* [Brand checks for private fields/methods](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-fields-in-in) at Stage 2
* Decorators found some contradictions among constraints folks have raised, see [doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1DSuLlEbAjBImDutX_rhjnA6821EUyj9rANzDVJS3QV0/edit#), still seeking help in survey
* [Function implementation hiding](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-function-implementation-hiding) blocked on browsers being uncertain on motivation
    * What is important for people to change? DevTools blackboxing? Omitted from error stack? Function.prototype.toString opaque? When do you want each?
* Other proposals folks are interested in?
