July 18, 2019, 20:00 Europe/Madrid

Attendees:

* Brian Kardell
* Justin Ridgewell
* John-David Dalton
* Benjamin Coe
* Kristen Hewell Garrett

 

Agenda and Notes:

* Nullish Coalescing operator precedence
    * Currently requires parens when mixing ?? and (&& or ||)
    * Could lower the precedence, meaning `a && b ?? c` parses as `(a && b) ?? c` and `a || b ?? c` parses as `(a || b) ?? c`.
    * [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-nullish-coalescing/issues/26](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-nullish-coalescing/issues/26)
    * JDD: There should be an implicit order, but I have no real preference for what the order is, I will use parens anyway - but they shouldn't be required
    * CG: Agree
    * BK: What if the order is the same though, that's kind of the question
    * JDD: is there a precedent for two having the same order?
    * JR: Math.  Currently you can't mix them, it requires parens, the proposal we're taking is that it would be mixable, but the order would be lower
    * [Group agrees we like that proposal better]

* Replace all [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-string-replaceall](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-string-replaceall)  [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-string-replaceall/issues/16](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=0&dest=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Ftc39%2Fproposal-string-replaceall%2Fissues%2F16)

    * JR: What if you pass a non-global regexp to replaceAll?  matchAll sets a precedent… what should .replaceAll do?
    * JDD: I don't understand why you would make it say all and then not be all?  This almost seems like it should be an argument to an existing method.  It just makes it really confusing when a method doesn't do what it's name says.  But at the same time, I am pro matching the same behavior of a similar named method which is also on strings.
    * JR: So, the proposal here is intended to avoid regexp escape bugs if your search was a string… So here it would throw if you passed it non-global regexp. If we do throw an error, we can open it up for other things in the future.
    * JDD: That is nice except in envs where you need to feature detect… Generally though I am for consistency.
    * CG: Not different behavior seems good.  I agree.



* Optional chaining (topic mentioned by JDD)
    * BK: Did you have thoughts? We talked about it recently, but we have some different people - I would love to hear your thoughts
    * JDD: I am for it
    * CG: Yes, this and nullish coalesing are great
    * BC: Yes, I am for it
    * BK: So, last time we had some discussion about an issue there, should we review it? JR, can you present it?

		[JR presents optional call]

```javascript
	//	Some examples for discussion
  foo?.()?.()?.()

  foo?.(a.b)

  foo?.(a).b.c

  function resolve(cd?: function()) {....})

  cb?.()

  iterator.return?.()
```
* JDD: Lodash and underscore have that on invoke
* JR: not exactly, not on an array
* JDD: Ah… yeah, that gets tricky. I have path arguments and params - when you translate that to syntax this kind of thing can happen. When I thought about chaining I never thought of optional calls - for me this is bonus. Is there a way we can get the main win and tackle this later
* JR: We tried that but the committee was opposed to separating them
* JDD: I don't understand why it has to be all at once - we are in other cases making sure we throw so we can extend later… seems sensible
* JR: That was our argument, but it didn't fly… we discussed like 10 different options for the syntax we could use, they all suck
* JDD: Is there something challenging for parsers
* JR: No
* CG: does it conflict with terniary?
* BC: No...
* BC: You almost have to carve it out… we don't have it in template strings
* JR: foo?.[bar]
* JDD: [dances a little] - you could put it in there.  As long as it doesn't complicate the parsing and it doesn't make it look _too_ bad or _too_ confusing, there are ways to manage this with spacing and stuff.  My stance would be I would prefer to punt on the optional calling, but if it comes down to this I would take it all.  It seems like it would be _really_ disappointing to get hung up on this thing, but I suppose they've been hung up on less
* BC: My impression is that there was more contention on ??
		

		

* JavaScript standard library / larger proposals around 'toast' and 'switch' integrating a vision/discussion [https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/4696](https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/4696) | [https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/4697](https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/4697)
