2020-01-16 19:00 UTC

### Attendees

 * DE - Daniel Ehrenberg (littledan@chromium.org)
 * FK - Fred Kleuver (Aurelia - [fred.kleuver@aurelia.io](mailto:fred.kleuver@aurelia.io))
 * RRI - Robin Ricard (Bloomberg - rricard2@bloomberg.net)
 * RE - Rob Eisenberg (Microsoft - [rob.eisenberg@microsoft.com](mailto:rob.eisenberg@microsoft.com))
 * MW - Michel Weststrate (Facebook, [mweststrate@fb.com](mailto:mweststrate@fb.com))
 * CHG - Chris Hewell Garrett (LinkedIn, cgarrett@linkedin.com)
 * JRL- Justin Ridgewell (Google, [jridgewell@google.com](mailto:jridgewell@google.com))
 * NS - Nicole Sullivan (Google, [nsull@google.com](mailto:nsull@google.com))
 * JHD - Jordan Harband (Opendoor, [ljharb@gmail.com](mailto:ljharb@gmail.com))
 * JF - Justin Fagnani (Google, [justinfagnani@google.com](mailto:justinfagnani@google.com))

### Agenda and notes

#### Decorators

* Viability of splitting up the proposal in 2 or 3 problem areas, e.g. [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/299](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/299) for traps
    * FK: Clarification on the problem areas (post-call):
        * 1. Metadata built-in decorator that can be applied to any object, class, property, method, etc. Metadata stored in association with target object, optionally with the property key
        * 2. Proxy-based decorator proposal that is only applicable to properties/methods. Can intercept getters/setters/other stuff in ways similar to proxies, but does not change shape of target. (technically you could change the shape of the target, as well as add metadata from within the interceptors, but in the common use cases there shouldn’t be a need for that)
        * 3. "The remainder of use cases": non-metadata decorators that are applicable to classes and functions.
* Where does metadata fit in?
* Previously someone suggested to identify low-level primitives for the static proposal. Answer to that was identify all problems/needs first. Where are we with identifying those?
* FK: many discussions, v8 team in here? Want to discuss next: proxy-based proposal notably
* JF: reservations about it, not sure it can be split
* JF: certain ideas like renaming don’t end in the trap paradigm at all. Then there are non-class-based : extended numeric types like type scaler. We don’t have an idea of where it could have gone to split up properly
* MW:  It could install arbitrary side effects as soon as decorators are flexible enough they’re pretty close to the original
* JRL: can we go over the proxy proposal details?
* FK: the idea is proxy-based decorators can’t change the shape of the object but they can intercept and do all sort of things: main idea is no change of shapes
* MW: can be optimized because of shape but it could have handler
* DE: other ones are babel legacy/TS experimental, static decorators (described in the decorator repo), proxy, and the previous Stage 2 descriptor-based language
* FK: proxy based is not all use cases so just a part. Other one is metadata that can do DI , metadata based rendering 
* JF: when you talk about metadata and traps you can’t compose them right. The ts/babel ones do more than just one thing so we need composition
* JRL: the orig proposal won’t go further anymore
* JF taking a step back is important , we need some kind of static analysis but we also need composition bc the base core semantics are based on operations like traps. Traps are just one of those things for the user
* MW: ???
* DE: it seems that a lot of people assume that they could do that with decorators
* JF: static deco are nice because ts can understand them easily: huge win for angular for instance because it lets us optimize compilation
* MG: For Angular, we're using 
* DE: splitting phrasing? Don’t understand: what does the symbol does: limit the scope to just trap? How do we do that without the sign? 
* FK: Traps only on props. The meta can be added to anything it really lives on the object that has the property
* MW: you can’t sep those though the signature would be different 
* CG: currently the proxy proposal, the deco receives the target. They could receive nothing and later on they could receive more
* FK: metadata would just be a built-in decorator 
* DE: sorry thought the version we're discussing wouldn't have built-in decorators
* FK: not 100% clear yet how the separation would map to current proposals
* JF: need to address fundamental questions 
* MW: trap as a basis of the impl. A deco is always a trap  but then it could do more
* DE: In the Proxy-based proposal, would it transform to a data prop into a getter/setter?
* MW: It could return a list of traps, and if the list is empty, leave it as is. The goal is to take a subset with 99% of cases
* DE: back to minko?
* MG:In Angular we use only built-in decorators to attach metadata to classes, properties, and constructor parameters.  

We consume it in two different ways depending on whether we compile the app AoT or JiT. With JiT we attach the metadata to the decorated object. With AoT just collect the metadata specified in the decorator's parameters.

* FK: same in aurelia btw
* JF: We have fully dynamic deco and compile them out
* DE: how to continue working on this together? Do we present proxy-based decorators to committee, something else?
* MW: Probably Proxy-based decorators are not ready for that yet. A big thing to answer is, what is the wiggle room we have (cc. Shu). We want to build something useful that will be acceptable to the V8 team, given the feedback they've given.
* JF: Zero way to metaprogramming on fields is the problem we want to solve. Quite a fan of static decorators: solves a lot of problems. Seems to solve the issues for implementers.
* DE: If you don’t know if you have a trap until it executes, we're back to some kind of dynamic shape.
* FK: follow up async (Justin, Michel, Dan, CHris Garett)
* CG: traps would solve most use cases: which is the point
* MW: we need someone from V8 in that discussion
* JF:@ make sure that Shu is here he has some kind of analysis
* DE: We can follow up with Shu about sharing his analysis further
* DE: Nicolo was working on decorators but is focusing on more stable things. He has a concrete solid plan for impl. Takes some work so needs stability
* JRL: Don’t want to repeat v1 decorator
* JF: Shu came to me and we will schedule
* DE: add yourself to the list at the end
* AI: Follow up async with JHD, JF, RK, CHG, V8, MW

#### Operator overloading

* [Operator overloadin](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-operator-overloading)g is at Stage 1. Many JS developers expressed concerns that frameworks would abuse it; I'd be curious of your thoughts.
    * DE: permit users to define operators - some developer feedback: frameworks will mess this up. It would be better to just add vectors but then concern of bloat in the ecosystem + impl what do you think?
    * <Someone>: I agree with the concern
    * NS: Use case that it solves?
    * DE: Vector/Matrices different numeric types: add your own, css units (long time requests of people from csswg, add + for units
    * JF: Units are a big area: make sure you don’t crash into mars by adding feet and meters, by making scalars have units and not permitting them to be used together inappropriately
    * FK: why import-based instead of e.g. symbols
    * DE: it’s a lexical declaration like use strict, not part of the import statement. We don't want the operator overloading proposal to be "too dynamic"
        * No monkey-patching of others' objects to add or change operator overloading behavior
        * It should not be possible to pass a value with operator overloading into a function which was written thinking just about Numbers and get unexpected behavior.
    * DE: I don’t plan to work on a dynamic-symbol based version: ES6 added a lot of symbols, and I think this was a mistake not to repeat. It had lots of negative performance consequences.
    * FK: fair enough
    * DE: Also the lexical declarations mean that the Babel transform was possible to write!
    * JRI: 2017 had a dynamic, symbol-based operator overloading that went nowhere for the reasons Dan said

#### Realms and SES

* [Realms](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-realms) and [SES](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-ses) under discussion. Are these relevant for frameworks?
    * DE: Needs for that here? More details?
    * All: would love to have this
    * FK: Realms are good with multiple big teams, removes iframes. Also to more easily test fx behavior in iframes
    * JF: People are using shadow roots as security boundaries -> bad, since they don't provide that. Really, iframes could provide this security boundary. Maybe Realms could provide better boundaries.
    * DE: Same or cross-origin iframes? This proposal is equivalent to same-origin iframes, but you might be suggesting that people use cross-origin iframes for security
    * JF: I guess this is a question for the proposal champions
    * DE: I think the champions consider it a possible basis for a sandbox, although it is equivalent to same origin iframes.
    * JF: Figma did engine in wasm, of shipping a whole JS interpreter for isolation. It'd be good to not have to do that.
    * JRL: We’re using a Worker [in AMP], would love to have a Realm
    * CG: Separate globals in different contexts gets trickier in SSR. Being able to say we don’t need to fork the process: globals isolation would be great.
    * DE: It's been good to hear a lot of use cases for Realms here. Feedback on frozen realms/SES?
    * <Q>: What is SES/frozen realms?
    * DE: SES is global object frozen and APIs frozen: multiple contexts can use the same frozen realm without interacting, with their global object based on it.
    * FK: It would be great to be able to construct something frozen and secure, where you can depend on its behavior.
    * DE: Would it matter if there are compat issues, e.g., monkey-patching of built-ins would break?
    * FK: Actually useful use case: reliable way to expose dependencies that tamper with globals
    * JH: More use cases: Testing if globals are untouched. You don’t have to cache but just borrow from the frozen realm
    * JF: Would some kind of copy-on-write be possible?
    * DE: Maybe; that's been investigated in the past, not sure the current status.

#### Record & Tuple

* [Record & Tuple](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple) has a [babel-powered playground to try it out](https://rickbutton.github.io/record-tuple-playground/)
    * RR: We had two main concerns from people on this call:
        * Deep immutability, which people raised concerns about in this call. This proposal is about value types, so that means that they don't have an observable point of view, so it would lead to some fundamental mismatches.
    * MW: For me, it would be completely acceptable if it's deeply immutable
    * DE: What's more important is that this could catch bugs, right?
    * RR: We also got the feedback that this should be a library, without literal syntax. But we think the literal syntax is really important for this proposal. === works for deeply equality, giving value semantics. We also have some more deep semantic issues we're discussing.
    * MW: I think the # is the clearest and the library version is the most unclear.
    * FK: Agree
    * MW: People inside the immutable data structure accidentally refer to a mutable data structure. It causes problems down the road. If you need an escape hatch, you can have an external map which a string points into. So I don't have any problems with that deep immutability.
    * RR: Yes, there's lots of ways we could keep track of this.
    * FK: Seems like records and tuples would work together very well with metadata from optimization point of view
    * JF: Maybe operator overloading could just apply to records and tuples. We could bring tagged template literals to a general tree structure. Maybe we could have an immutable reference to a mutable thing
    * MG: I like the syntax and the deep immutability. One question: ``` const a = #{ a: 1 } const b = #{ a: 1 } console.assert(a === b); ``` Are `a` and `b` pointing to the same place in memory or these are two separate instances? Or this is an implementation detail that's not part of the spec? (A: implementation detail)
    * CG: I'm a fan of this proposal. Syntax is better than a class. My initial impulse was that # is better, but maybe bar is clearer because of private. Deep immutability is a great idea.
    * RR: It's annoying to type the bar without editor completion.
