April 18, 2019, 19:00 UTC

Attendees:

* Michel Weststrate
* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Minko Gechev
* Justin Fagnani
* Manu Mtz.-Almeida
* Anne van Kesteren
* Jason Miller
* Adam Bradley

Agenda and notes:

* Special edition: HTML discussion. Guest attendee: Anne van Kesteren
* SharedArrayBuffer -- what will it take to ship everywhere - Adam Bradley [https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/issues/1435](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/issues/1435) 
    * AK: High-resolution timers make Spectre meven worse, so to mitigate this, browsers have been pulling back SharedArrayBuffer for now. Most browsers have disabled SAB; Chrome enables it, but I'd change how they enable it, as it's still open to some attacks. What we'll do about it: two new headers: the first header:
        * The first header gives you a new process. It's the inverse of realm.opener. Nobody has a reference to you. It closes the browsing context your resource is loaded in, and gives your resource a fresh browsing context. This gives defense against popups navigating you, etc. This is "Cross-origin opener policy". Everyone seems on board with that, but it needs more developer testing.
        * If you're the attacker, you can still get at everyone within this policy. You also need something to defend against potential victims. Let's call this header TBD. Maybe it'd be Cross-origin Resource Policy with a cross-site token. Or, we could require CORS and upgrade non-CORS requests to CORS. There are other ideas that seem unlikely.
            * If you have your own process, and you have a pdf, it might be pulled into your process. What this would ensure is that cross-origin subresources are not pulled into your process. This would help, e.g., on Android, which has trouble opening other processes.
        * If you set both, your agent cluster gets to have its "high-resolution timer flag" set. We're planning that SharedArrayBuffer is enabled by default, but you need these flags to be able to message it to workers. So the JavaScript language has all features enabled, but in HTML where postMessage is specified, we'd check for these flags
    * DE: Will this be workable for your frameworks?
    * Manu: We are thinking about using SharedArrayBuffer in the CLI in Node, so it's not really relevant. But we're hoping to have the compiler also in the browser, but it's a future thing.
    * MW: If you build a client-side framework that requires those, this is leaky.
    * AK: Yes, you need associated server-side changes, or fall back to single-threaded usage.

* [CSS Modules](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/759) - Justin Fagnani
    * JF: CSS modules are a proposal I made in an informal form in the web components GitHub repo. You can import CSS files with the JS module loader. It's a simple proposal now; a CSS module just has a default export of the stylesheet. That's the whole proposal. They plug into the rest of the platform where, [constructible stylesheets](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/02/constructable-stylesheets) are shipping now in Chrome, and they brought "adopted stylesheets", which lets you apply a stylesheet programmatically without a DOM element. You'd need a native webpackaging.
    * DE: Can't you use a synthetic class to implement style scoping?
    * JF: Yes, but we'd like to move away from this. Another implementation technique is <missed it>. Anyway, the basic proposal is that you export the whole document, but in a follow-on proposal, there's Sunil Pai's CSS references proposal, which would work well.
    * DE: A lot of frameworks have various mechanisms for bundling styles with components. Will this subsume those, or will they put something on top?
    * JF: I wanted to start with the simplest possible thing that we could agree on. Allowing you to put a stylesheet in the object graph 
    * Manu: I'm wondering if this should be just for CSS or for any format. This could be useful for JSON, or even images. Managing assets in web component is complicated. I love this idea, and I wonder if it could be extended to a loader way.
    * JF: There's a proposal for JSON modules and HTML modules. Microsoft is taking up some of the champion-ship of this. They are very interested in HTML modules. The Web knows how to 
    * DE: Loading of arbitrary content as part of the JS module graph is something that is likely to see high resistance, due to the desire to avoid executing JS and instead having things be declarative and interpretable by the browser.
    * JF: One of the reasons is because it implies the resource is important enough that failure to load should cascade up the graph.
    * JM: One difference is that imports block loading, and fetch happens later. So fetch seems to work well here.
    * AK: Don’t SW put JS on the loading path? (aside: jason’s [terrible SW hack](https://gist.github.com/developit/689aa4415bd688f3fce923cb8ae9abe7) to polyfill CSS modules) 
    * AK: The motivation for this is basically ergonomics. You can polyfill all these things on top of fetch, but it's a lot more code.
    * JF: You can polyfill the dynamic version on top of fetch, but not the static version. For bundlers and booting the app, i think it's important.
    * JM: The static version is important, unless we have top-level await
    * Manu: It's also very useful for Rollup, so it can decide what to put in the bundle.
    * DE: To AK's question, I thought we were not going to have programmable loading hooks, as documented in [https://github.com/wicg/import-maps/#a-programmable-resolution-hook](https://github.com/wicg/import-maps/#a-programmable-resolution-hook) 
    * AK: I think we could have ServiceWorker on first run if we can get the origin manivest/origin policy. I think Chrome is working on that. If it's demonstrated, the next logical step would be to see if we can have it work for ServiceWorker
    * DE: How should we make this decision?
    * AK: it's a resource thing. Can we get a file from a server, and by its response, decide how to load other things. If that works out and is performant, then it doesn't seem unreasonable that another step would hbe having a ServiceWorker. We discussed, even if you have a ServiceWorker doing all the nodes, you need something converting the response into a JavaScript object, and that runs on the main thread.
    * JF: The complexity here is a reason why I'd suggest we start with built-in module semantics. Native modules are not used much even though they are well-supported, and these can help make good on the investment.
    * Manu: It'd be great to have input from TypeScript on this feature. How do you integrate CSS with TypeScript?
    * JF: I can check with them; I don't expect a problem. For the basic semantics, it's just a default export with CSSStyleSheet. Later, maybe they will analyze CSS files, but for the first step, no need to analyze CSS files.e

* HTMLElement - Adam Bradley
    * Extending a global HTMLElement within a server environment is difficult for both prerendering/SSR and unit testing. Would be interested to talk about various ways to not directly tie the global HTMLElement to a specific ownerDocument.
    * AB: We're working on SSR, custom elements, and a lot of it has to do with globals. Globals are the enemy. You can spin up a VM with your own globals, window, etc. This feels wrong, in that HTMLElement, which is still wired to a particular document. When you construct a document, it's attached to a very specific document. I don't understand why that is. HTMLElement is just a class. It doesn't need a specific global. So it's a general question: Why does HTMLElement need to be attacked to a specific document when it's constructed? If it's a Window object, but tied to a document.
    * AK: In these other frameworks, there's no association with document?
    * AB: If i were to make a class in Java, I can extend the base class and make many of htem. It doesn't matter what environment it was constructed in. For HTMLElement, it needs its magical global from when it was constructed. For SSR, we have a billion requests. The server needs to have the right document associated with the user. It's hard to associate a very specific document to a specific user.
    * AK: It's a little hard to follow. The document has a bunch of state that the element needs, e.g., the base URL. The general question is, why are classes tied to a global? An element can exist outside of a document, and it can even start fetching before it's added to the document.
    * AB: I'd expect the base URL to be empty
    * JM: The usual approach is that you're getting the document, since there are side effects you can't control.
    * AB: If I extend a class, it's based on the global object and the
    * AK: Yeah, since it's associated with the global, and in a browser, that's wired to the document. It sounds like you want to create one of these classes with a different document.
    * AB: That's basically what we have to do. It's like a normal browser, a brand new state. The first time the JS is parsed, when it's constructed from the extended HTML element, you can't give it a new document.
    * JF: There's no reason why the Node environment has to match the browser environment. You could make your elements virtualize the underlying document, and swap them out. JSDOM is very spec-compliant. This makes it very flexible. But if you want to write a different DOM implementation, you could optimize it for being able to reuse vms.
    * AK: That's what we're doing, and I just wanted to ask the question about why it's associated with the document.
    * JM: WIthin Google, we've been thinking about what it'd be like to implement a lightweight, HTML-oriented DOM in the JS engine. This would be a potential clean-room implementation of these things that would be portable to Node.
    * AK: That would be amazing, e.g., for a WebWorker, with a new document in there.
    * JM: One thing we ran into is, from a performance standpoint, we'd want the constructors to be shared, but from a compatibility standpoint, it's not matching.
    * JF: It'd be good to be able to initialize a VM and fork it.
    * AK: Why do you need a new VM? Answer: VM means a new global
    * JM: If you subclass something, you need to create a new constructor for each request.
    * AK: Could you have many documents inside your single global?
    * JF: Maybe it could fork from a single document. You don't want to leak things anyway, so maybe you do want different globals
    * JM: What if you had a document that you wanted to base your elements off of, and use inheritance to set them up?
* Microtasks - Fred Kleuver
* import maps? (is anyone interested?)
* Next meeting's agenda
    * Proposal: internationalization (i18n!)--What is Intl/ECMA-402, where is it going, introduction to Project Fluent, and how can i18n in JS/the web meet your users' needs.
    * Interested in this topic? Does anyone working on your framework want to join the next call?
    * *thumbs up*
