## 2020-04-16 20:00 Europe/Madrid

### Attendees

* Daniel Ehrenberg (DE)
* Robin Ricard (RRD)
* Rick Button (RBU)
* Steve Hicks (SH)
* Justin Fagnani (JF)
* Fred Kleuver (FK)
* John-David Dalton (JDD)
* Stephen Fluin (SAF)
* Max Heiber (MH)
* Rob Eisenberg (RE)

### Agenda and notes

## March/April 2020 TC39 review

* [WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/): Stage 3 update, iterated on some details, now [likely to ship soon in Chrome](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!topic/blink-dev/L04PqDk9eMU)

DE: (presents TC39 update slides)

DE: Seems likely that it is going to ship in Chrome. If you look at blink-dev, there is an intent to ship for WeakRefs. I hope we hear back soon, but basically it is done. If you go to the proposal, there is some great docs written by TJ Croweler, if you want to learn how to use WeakRefs. Any comments or questions?

RE: Yes please!

* [Record and tuple](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple): Stage 1 update, lots of proposed answers to open questions; please experiment with it in its playground

DE: (presents TC39 update slides)

JF: Would that apply to objects as well?

DE: I don;’t think it would work for objects. We are proposing that you can only put these deep paths in a record literal. To do these deep changes, you have to clone things inside the object, the operation of cloning an object and copying 1 property, is not structure preserving.

JF: There is an analogous problem with Object.assign here. Having syntax would be interesting.

DE: I can see how it would be nice, but it doesn’t fit with the generality of objects. It doesn’t rule out objects in the future. Would that be a reasonable path?

JF: Yes

DE: (continues to present slides)


JF: Can you describe this real quick? What is the return value?

DE: A symbol.

JF: This is the same pattern, as the one in the playground?

RRD: That is the one I proposed a few calls before. The only difference between a userland impl and this one is that with RefCollection you have automatically cleaned references.

JF: The key behavior you need here is you need a function that returns a record. Now the references might change.

DE: RefCollection allows this because you can give it a symbol to reuse, it will use the symbol if it is not in the collection.

JF: I would be interested in a vdom example. Having the record be identical but the references be different.

DE: Can we follow up on an issue in the RefCollection repo?

JF: Yes.

SH: It is an error to put an object in a record?

DE: It is a TypeError.

JF: Was there any talk of syntax for a ref collection?

RRD: Not yet.

JF: I keep trying to draw the relationship to template literals.

DE: I’m not a fan of syntactic ref collections. I’d like to discuss this more in issues.

https://github.com/rricard/proposal-refcollection/

* [Optional chaining + private fields](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-fields/pull/301): Now can be used together, as `obj?.#x`

DE: (presents TC39 slides for optional chaining + private fields)

* [Temporal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-temporal): Stage 2 update, lots of details narrowed down, prototyping/documentation review welcome

DE: (presents TC39 update slides)

RE: Is there integration with stringify/parse around this?

DE: When you do toJson on it, it will output with an ISO 8601 thing. It is the same as .toString. For parsing, you have to specifically call the temporal constructor for that. If you call Temporal.Date.from and pass in a ISO 8601 it does that. When you deserialize JSON you have to pass it to the constructor. I know it would be nice to do automatically, but we can’t change JSON grammar and change the behavior for JSON.parse.

RE: People will use the same workarounds.

DE: Is that what people do?

RE: People that have large model libraries will do that. It is a common pattern.

DE: That is interesting. Do you have an example?

RE: I’m not talking about public libraries, I’m talking like apps. Where the json.toModel serialization lives. I have done this myself and have borrowed the code from public repos or forums where I was looking for a solution. It is out there and used.

DE: References to public forums where it is discussed would be interesting. People are asking this a lot with BitInt and Decimal.

RE: We talked about this for BigInt as well. People do things like hook into stringify to do some special thing. It’s not like it isn’t a solvable problem, everyone does it a bit different. As we proliferate these primitive types, it becomes a larger problem over time.

DE: Do you think there is something we can do to solve this? Within these compatibility constraints.

RE: I thought about it at one point in time and haven’t since then. We had a discussion at one point. In serialization scenarios, outside the browser, nearly everything on every platform has more ways to convert to-from types, most people hack that into stringify/parse with their own custom formats around those things, but there isn’t a standard around that. I don’t know if we can patch that into the existing parsing or not.

DE: I don’t know if any subset of people here would be interested in following up. If you are interested please let me know offline.

* [Number.range](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-Number.range/): New Stage 1 proposal, finally

DE: (presents explainer)

RBU: Yes please!

* [Logical Assignment](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-logical-assignment): `a ??= b;` Reached  Stage 3

DE: (presents explainer)

## Enums

* [Proposal repository](https://github.com/rbuckton/proposal-enum/)

DE: Do people here have any use cases or requirements for enums?

MG: We are using them for configuring components. The TS enums.

DE: How do the TS enums work for you? Do they work well?

MG: Yeah. We are using const enums, and they have been working fine. We haven’t had any negative feedback.

JF: My project uses TS and enum like patterns, we strictly avoid typescript enums because they are one of the 2-3 non TS features that has a JS emit in TS. It emits some pattern in JS which is difficult for JS users to interpret if they aren’t also a TS user. We generally create objects that have a mapping from some key->value. With records, how is this enum really different from a record? If you made a top level record with key value pairs, it is immutable, with a couple of lookup functions you can emulate enums here. In the motivation I didn’t see why JS needs this on top of what it has.

MG: Const enums, after the compile time step, their payload is reduced. In this case, it is not as readable, but does not have significant impact either.

JF: If enums are first class values, they have runtime values, you can’t inline them across modules. It can be a post bundling optimization step. A bundler should be able to inline anything from a record if possible.

SH: My understanding is that there is some guarantee via the syntax that it is immutable.

JF: That is why I am asking about the relationship to records. The one benefit is the auto-increment feature, but I’ve also thought that auto-increment is a footgun. Very curious about the interaction with json here.

DE: We are getting into a lot of details here, I wonder if we can talk about high level patterns.

JF: The reason I got into details is because this is a pattern I use without TS enums. I think the high level should be "why is this better than records"

SH: Closure enums are just an object literal. It will ensure that they are immutable.

DE: There is this other version where we can use enums like Swift has, where they have payloads, different options, these are like abstract data types like OCaml of Haskell.

SH: This is certainly different than the existing pattern.

JF: It is nice to think about, but without starting with the pattern matching proposal this seems like a weird place to start.

DE: I don’t agree with that, you can have a kind getter.

JF: It seems like when you dereference an enum key you get the value of that key, like an integer, you aren’t passing around a first class reference to the enum and it’s key. If you have one of these things as a value and serialize, it will be serialized as an integer.

DE: I guess this is related to serialization/deserialization question RE raised earlier. We don’t have a way to help with user defined types.

JF: It makes enums very fragile for a little bit of additional syntax sugar.

DE: What about bit-packing features?

JF: Can you describe this? Using bitwise operators to store multiple values.

DE: Yeah

JF: This is something we do to keep a bunch of state in a single value.

MG: This is very heavily used in angular as well as in the internals. We are using the same pattern.

JF: Anything that lets you have a number value would fit.

SH: When you say records you mean the new proposal?

JF: Yes

SH: I’m kind of underwhelmed by this as a language feature.

DE: We have a lot more people in this call. Do any of you have thoughts on these things?

JM: I tend to use bitmasks, if it fits into that bucket for me, it’s hard to treat it as anything other than that. Maybe serialization is a way to make that less implicit. I’m not having an issue using bit fields for this. Performance advantages to doing that. I wouldn’t want to give that up in order to get syntax.

MH: A lot of what people are saying jives with I think. I was interested in ADT enum, and see that as a different direction. I find myself very often using this pattern in TypeScript. I wonder how many people use the discriminated union trick.

MG: I’ve been using this a lot in different use cases. I was inspired to use it via the type system, but not sure I would use it otherwise. 

MH: The redux style command pattern thing is where I have seen this alot. I think that what hurts it is the boilerplate-y code you have to write, the solution was action creators. I think there is some evidence that people don’t like doing this pattern without syntax. Is there someone outside of TS or redux that does this?

JM: One of the fundamental things about vdom is that there is always a "type" field as a differentiator to find out what properties are on this otherwise generic property bag.

MH: Could you see any advantage to dedicated syntax?

JM: There is some validity there. People have gone to great lengths to hide the implementation for virtual dom nodes. This would be one way to get around that. The primary reason why those things exist is so you can create objects that are monomorphic at all usage sites.

MH: I think OCaml has proved that they can have fast discriminated unions.

JM: I can see this being an optimization. I wouldn’t want the syntax without a path to engine optimization.	


DE: I would be careful with respect to engines, there are lots fo things that cause engines to use different maps/hidden shapes. These types of things by construction would eliminate one class of hidden shapes, but wouldn’t change everything. If we asked engine authors, they would reserve the right …

JM: I’m looking for either this or typed objects that provide a stronger or weaker guarantee. I see the kind field as a mock constructor.

DE: With this syntax, result.failure would be a function you can call with a value.

SH: I’m a fan from the design point of view. Especially with TS, the extra safety is very useful. It is a good pattern we should be encouraging more use of.

MH: Ron links to various enum-y type things in the proposal. Are these string or number enums?

DE: These are string enums. WebIDL enums are not reified at all, they are a set of strings/numbers.

JM: They do have constants that correspond to them. But it may be a string/number. The IDL output is really just validation on the setter for the corresponding property.

DE: We can decide if we make a JS enum feature we can chose whether to make it match IDL enums.

JM: It would be a place to draw inspiration or requirements from. That may or may not be desirable on the JS side.

DE: In particular, Ron’s proposal does encompass this sort of thing, the ADT style one doesn’t. Not sure how priority of a goal it is. Does anyone have further comments?

MH: On the last question, what would the result be?

RBU: I would be shocked if they weren’t.

RBU: …

MH: If you expect them to be equal, the only way would be to make them records or tuples. Ron proposed the struct proposal as a solution for this. It scratches the same itch as record/tuple.

DE: For me, I have a lot of questions about struct. If we did ADT style enums I would prefer record/tuple values, but I don’t know if we have a lot of support for ADT style enums in this call.

MH: Do people really care if it were equal? 

SH: They should be equal, but I'm not sure if I care.

JM: I can’t see myself constructing one just to see if it is equal.

TC: +1 If they’re equal

DE: I guess we are out of time. Thanks for coming everybody. Please let me know if you have topics for the next time. See you in a month!

* Presented at TC39 2 years ago; been at Stage 0
* Potential extension: [ADT enums (enums with parameters)](https://github.com/rbuckton/proposal-enum/issues/6#issuecomment-608187210)
* Discussion questions:
    * Use cases/requirements for enums?
    * [Redux action types](https://redux.js.org/basics/actions) are often cited as a use case for enums. How do enums come up in your framework?
    * What do you really think of [TypeScript enums](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/enums.html)?
    * Presented at TC39 2 years ago; been at Stage 0
    * Potential extension: ADT enums (enums with parameters)Is there interest in the advanced features of the proposal (parsing, bit-backing support, customizable auto-incrementing)
    * Any thoughts on the options listed above (particularly ADT enums)?
    * Motivation: Why is this better than records and/or objects?
    * Is auto-incrementing dangerous in the presence of JSON serialization? Ie, will changing the enum break JSON deserialization?
    * What's the WebIDL story?

## Module Attributes

DE: (presents explainer)

JF: I’m confused about that. If the type isn’t part of the module cache key, what happens when you have conflicting types?

DE: Type is only a check. It is only required to use to reinforce the data that already is there. If you want to change the semantics of a module it will require another type.

JF: There isn’t a large effective difference then, there is only one valid value.

DE: It will prevent the whole module graph from loading. I know people are interested in more elaborate fallbacks but I don’t know how this will work.
