## 2020-07-16 20:00 Europe/Madrid

### Attendees

* Robin Ricard (RRD)
* Kristen Hewell Garrett (KHG)
* Rick Button (RBU)
* Justin Fagnani (JF)
* Daniel Ehrenberg (DE)
* John-David Dalton (JDD)
* Misko Hevery (MH)
* Richard Gibson (RGN)
* Rob Eisenberg (RHE)
* Justin Ridgewell (JRL)

### Agenda and notes

## July 2020 TC39 Agenda

* Stage 4 proposals
    * [WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/) deferring cleanupSome for a separate proposal
        * *Excitement across the board*
        * multiple: useful for polyfills
        * DE: what about cleanupSome?
        * RBU: gonna be useful for wasm - have anecdotal evidence of code that is long running, it’s not theoretical
    * [Logical Assignment](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-logical-assignment/) a ??= b

    * [NumericLiteralSeparator](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/2043) 1_000_000
    * [dateStyle and timeStyle options for Intl.DateTimeFormat](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-datetime-style)
    * [Intl.ListFormat](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-list-format)
* [Import conditions](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-conditions) for stage 3
    * if syntax to ensure type of module and possible additional restrictions
    * with syntax possible in a follow-on proposal to add transformations
    * In-band proposal orthogonal to other (defined by host environments)
    * DE: (presents) Note: thinking of renaming if to assert + open question about caching. Does this makes sense
    * JF: what is that open question
    * DE: decided that it would only be import conditions - are they part of the cacheKey? - DD thinks they shouldn’t be part - we allow host env to … 
    * JF: This has an implication for whether a specifier is valid.
    * DE: I think it would determine whether you can get multiple copies of the module. I said that in the issue thread but domenic said it was wrong but I’m unsure how
    * JF: Let’s say node does not require this, if it is a part of the cache key...
    * DE: It is whether it is allowed to be a part of the cache key, not whether it is required. Each time this operation is called with a speciifc _referringModuleAndSpecifier_ it must return the same module record. We are thinking about allowing the conditions in this tuple. Any module loader will take the specifier tne path and use it as a cache key. You are allowed to use the condition.
    * JF: so if host says it is optional then it probably wouldn’t include in the cache key
    * DE: Or it would normalize it somehow. I don’t understand why anyone would want to include it in the cache key.

* [Upsert (now emplace)](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-upsert) for Stage 3
    * DE: (presents)
    * CG: this is going to be very useful as it is a common pattern and it will be used a lot
    * DE: Insert and update callbacks, do you think they’re useful?
    * CG: Yeah I think it makes sense, there are times where you want to do something different on updates.
    * JF: I’m mostly aware of use cases for insert, update much less so. I have slight concerns about the API. The readme doesn’t call out perf as a reason to do this, but the readme counts lookups. It seems to imply that the reason is to reduce lookups. The way that the options bag is a parameter, in several of my use cases I have a cache, and it needs to compute a value for a key and side info, it will need a closure.
    * DE: I agree with you that the perf arg doesn’t make much time and I mentioned it. People said look this is a big improvement.  I wouldn’t be happy with adding this just for performance, but - was it CG that said ergonomics? That seems like a good reason.
    * CG: the biggest win is ergonomics, I typed has/get/set  so many times, performance is a secondary reason.
    * JF: fear that it could be perf negative since you pass a closure etc..
    * DE:  I don’t think we should be restricting stdlib functionality based on the micro-optimization.
    * JF: I’ve seen this, where it has measurable effect.
    *  DE: oh I see
    * JF: I was shocked by it, but I’ve seen it.
    * DE: Emplacing things in maps is exactly what tends to be perf sensitive, is that what you are saying?
    * JF: yes because you want to look up, yes inserting is a one time thing but you need the lookups to be very fast
    * DE: We don’t have this on WeakMaps so we can’t use it for template caches.
    * CG: What we do is Map.getkey and then set it, which reduces the number of lookups.
    * JDD: I did the same thing  
    * JF: if you try to reduce to one lookup instead of 2 you have the overhead of the closure
    * CG: I feel like there are a lot of cases where I want to create an object without any local state at all. I feel like in that case when you create a const function or a function that doesn’t use local state it may be faster? I’m not sure.
    * DE: if implementers go wild with it they can go with inlining. I kinda want to focus on ergonomics first before thinking about perf.
    * There are other things like hte regex index that added a lot of overhead in a non-local way. If it adds overhead it will be local to the method.
    * JF: on the ergonomics I would rather have a constructor parameter and it’s the same thing as a key
    *  DE: there is a proposal from the same people behind this
    *  JF: is it a computing map proposal? I’ll find it!
    * JRL: (late): a computing map proposal would be great. It's much more common for me to want a default value in the map than to update it.
* Other stage 3 proposals
    * [Intl.Segmenter](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter)
    * [Ergonomic brand checks for private fields](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-fields-in-in)
* [Record & Tuple](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple) & [Symbols as WeakMap Keys](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-symbols-as-weakmap-keys) for Stage 2
    * Map/Set-like equality semantics with ==/=== so that:
#[NaN] === #[NaN] and #[+0] === #[-0]
    * Still open for stage 3:
Eq semantics / Method Names / extensible wrapper object / Record prototype
Syntax: possibility to move to {| } and [| ]
    * RRD: Finishing up details on [Tuples]. The idea is that we settled on the notion of equality. Let me get the slides… so basically what we’re going to go with is the same semantics are set/value/keys has. For ex: adding to a set [missing]. The main reason we want to do this is to avoid black holing structures. If the computed value ends up returning NaN we are in a tough situation because the [...missing]. Second thing is +0/-0. Ex [....]. Trying to make NaN an +0/0 normalized for checking if values exist. We have a bunch of small issues that are open and syntax is still open until stage 3. Looking for feedback on the Tuples.prototype. 
    * DE: Also semantics when converting to a string. Similar to object/array when coercing to a string. Would this be useful for developers? Would be great to get feedback. 
    * [QA] on SameValueZero comparisons.
    * JDD: This is like comparisons for map and set keys?
    * DE: Yes, actually it used to be called SameValueZero in the slides, but that was seen as confusing.
    * [DE clarifying to MH about what the semantics are]
    * MH: OK, these semantics seem very reasonable
    * RRD: [Asking for feedback on syntax]
    * MH: It's confusing for my brain if the token is inside, rather than outside 
    * JF: It seems like the symbol should be outside, otherwise it's like Lisp
    * RRD: Is it confusing that we're reusing #, when private already uses it?
    * MH: I wonder if people will get confused if they think # is an operator, and try to apply it to a variable, but instead it will end up as a private symbol.
    * RRD: Maybe this will be alleviated partly by syntax highlighting, where they would show up as different colors
    * JF: Someone was suggesting an identifier, so this could be some kind of template literal?
    * DE: I think if we want to permit Tag#{ } , we'd want to prohibit a Record or Tuple at the beginning of a line--we might want to update the spec text for this. Separately, in Axel Rauschmayer's blog post, he investigated how this would look without literal syntax, just function calls, and I think that showed that this looks really terrible without syntax.
    * JF: I think it could do something interesting with the holes.
    * RRD: You're not the only one bringing this up. We've been thinking about this, and it's an important topic.
    * RRD: Symbols as WeakMap keys: it's research on, how to put objects inside Records and Tuples. Rick, Dan and I are championing it. We don't want objects to be *directly* in Records and Tuples--everything in there can't be mutated, including wrapper objects, so that users don't have the possibility to make anything not immutable in them. So, you can't reference objects directly. But, with a set of references in a reference keeper, then you could keep track of things inside of the Record and Tuple, and dereference them when needed. Ultimately, you can have objects inside of Records and Tuples, you just need to be explicit about them, using this proposal.
    * JF: I think this misses the use case by a couple of degrees, because you want to reuse the same symbols, across multiple evaluations, like a template.
    * DE: That's fine, but you don't need this proposal for it; Records and Tuples already solve this without changes.
    * JF: But, that makes it hard to make sure you include the right Symbols in place.
    * RRD: For that, I'd use integer indices instead.
    * RBU: You can do these things in userland, as well
    * JF: Do we have the syntactic space available to add ${ }
    * DE: Yes, we have that space, but I think that syntax doesn't make sense, since the Record or Tuple literal contains arbitrary expressions
    * JF: We want to be able to 
    * RRD: I am thinking about a userland solution, maybe using template literals and JSON.parseImmutable internally
    * DE: Next meeting, I want to discuss performance expectations around records and tuples. I've heard people interested in fast comparisons, structure sharing, and sharing across workers, but these are somewhat in conflict. Please get in touch if you have thoughts, or otherwise we'll discuss at a future meeting.
    * DE: Are you in favor of records and tuples going to Stage 2 next meeting?
    * [Thumbs up from JDD, JF, CDG, MH]
    * DE: Would there be a lot to learn, or would this be intuitive?
    * RHE: The bigger learning curve would be, working with immutable data, to use them well, whereas the basic semantics and APIs would not be much to learn.
    * JF: It would be interesting, the impedance mismatch with mutable things nested in immutable things. Even with Symbols as WeakMap keys, you'd need some userland solution; it would be too difficult to use directly.
    * RRD: Yeah, we're thinking about different userland things
