
## 2020-02-20 19:00 UTC

### Attendees

* Brian Kardell
* Justin Fagnani
* Rick Button
* Rob Eisenberg
* Fred Kleuver
* Scott Haseley
* Ian Sutherland
* Dan Ehrenberg
* Justin Ridgewell

### Agenda and notes

#### Scheduling API

* <Scott presents introduction with [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1JGM5_Nq6xFIqCacCCNOyil-NweDbQ-g212VtvPbEkIs/edit?usp=sharing) to start the discussion>...
 * Jason Miller: What is the potential interaction between this and crossing threads
 * Scott: In so far as worker contexts?
 * Jason: Yes, basically.
 * Scott: This is so far in context of the main thread, but there have been some discussions just this week based on conversations and work being done in angular to offload things in workers.  I'm just brainstorming but perhaps applying priorities to the workers themselves could be interesting - usually this would happen at the OS level
 * Jason: So a macro-level priority
  * Scott: Yes
  * Jason: Did I see a thing about async..?
  * Scott: For various reasons we settled on the controller based approach. postTask now just returns a promise. It's just a lot cleaner.  There's a doc linked on the explainer. Task queues get a little clumsy - the original approach was ver task queue based, now the method looks very similar to what fetch looks like.
  * Justin R: What does that signal when the promise resolves
  * Scott: The promise represents the results of the task
  * Fred: How do you cancel it then?
  * Scott: It's controller based - like abortController.  You can pass a signal to whatever tasks.  This gets useful for modeling subtasks.  One of the examples linked from the explainer shows similarities with how you abort fetches.
  * Justin F: Has there been discussion about grouping them somehow, with like child signals and parent signals that you could control intelligently.
  * Scott: That would be interesting, but at least in terms of who we've talked to so far that hasn't come up - can you say more
  * Justin F: If you had, for example, a parent that was in charge of a bunch of child tasks then you could do that
  * Jason Miller: Am I correct in that you could do this yourself in the user-land space? 
  * Scott: ..
  * Jason: So, it cancels at the next available yield point?
  * Justin F: If you have the thread such that you can call abort, it isn't running?
  * Scott: It would be queued. 
  * Justin F: If you call scheduler.yield that is going to abort?
  * Scott: Yes
  * Jason: There should be a turn of the microtask queue before the task resolves
  * ???: Would the task resolve or reject?
  * Scott: It would reject.
  * Justin F: You mentioned job queues -- one thing for a job queue is that it wants to await for work that wants to be done. I can see this in userland to do combined work and you could use the task controller to signal
  * Jason: That brings up a point I didn't see covered: is the queue introspectable somehow
  * Scott: No, not currently - are there benefit you think that would add?
  * Justin F: we shedule a lot of stuff on the microtask queue, and we want to say something should go after all of the current tasks, and the next - it's impossible. You end up having to just go to the next rAF
  * Scott: That's what I was thinking with this async job queue - it's not the individual tasks - I'm calling it a job - it runs all of its work to completion
  * Justin F: Maybe related to the DOM - there is an internal doc I wrote years ago to make async rendered components 1st class citizens.. You want to have a group of them and wait for them in groups.  This is what we do in LitElement, but one thing we can't do today is await a subtree. Without manually waiting for each thing, we can't wait for the subtree. The scheduler might allow that actually if you inherited the task tree.  You could await the whole thing -- does that make sense
  * Scott: It makes sense.. You are probably not inheriting, but… 
  * Justin F: It works if you know explicitly what the children are and that you have to wait for them - you might not have references to them - even crawling is expensive, or you have a multi-actor communication problem and you invent an API.
  * Scott: Thanks, I can take that for some review/feedback
  * Rob Eisenberg: in some of the userland solutions, we wound up creating a lot of closures- this created some performance problems….
  * Scott: Duly noted, we will think about this some more.
  * Fred: (regarding reusing task objects) I brought this up in an email thread
  * Scott: Yes, this is interesting to have more coordination on.
  * Fred: ??
  * Scott: I don't know how feedback will go - TAG review and so on, but it seems very reasonable to me
  * Justin R: We have a taskController that is a new global… we have a scheduler which is a new global. How is the postTask that I schedule able to reflect my taskController's changed priority?
  * Scott: Internally, the scheduler will use the new priority to reschedule the tasks. It's associated via the `signal` that's passed when calling postTask
  * Justin R: If I am living only in the AMP project, I can use FastDOM - but if you have your own FastDOM, we can't cooperate to say that all these measures can happen at the same time.  With a scheduler we can delay tasks, but I'm not sure how we can actually cooperate.
  * Scott: If you can annotate your postTasks, then it could solve the problems. Once we get this out to an origin trial, we want to start designing these things.
  * Fred: I would like to take some time to review this and think about it more - there is a lot here, it is kind of hard to come up with really quality comments and feedback on the fly
  * Marvin: How do promises interact with the scheduler? In Preact we use a Promise task to schedule our current work. I wonder how that code plays together.
  * Scott: I don’t quite understand. How does the promise task work now?
  * Marvin: When a component is dirty, we put it into a queue, and we start that queue with a Promise execution. It's run in the microtask.
  * Scott: We're not doing anything with the microtasks. Everything here runs as a macrotask, as a turn of the event loop. Awaiting a Promise happens inside the microtask queue. This can cause problems if the sequence of microtasks is too long. We have ideas for addressing that--mostly around breaking how microtasks work, which doesn't sound so great. So we're thinking about giving people tools which makes it less attractive to build up big strings of microtasks.
  * Justin: We use the microtask queue heavily explicitly so that we block the next frame. The ability to use task controllers is compelling, it would be useful to use microtask scheduling with a task controller api.
  *  Fred: I agree
  *  Scott: We cut the number of priorities down to a minimum. We had a render-blocking priority, but use cases were insufficient. It sounds like you want a priority with some guarantees.
  * Fred: I like the API for this. In Aurelia, I've implemented a scheduler, which has a "flush requester", e.g., Promise.resolve, setTimeout, requestAnimationFrame, requestIdleCallback. This allows neat integration into existing libraries which don't use the scheduler but use these timings.
  * Justin F: It would be useful to go through the scheduler API for stuff user blocking, and dynamic prioritization for the microtask queue, if you need to paint something real quick.
  * Scott: We had a priority called "immediate", which was basically render blocking, but maybe it needs to be “higher”, render blocking.
  * Jason: ?? alluded to React doing this. You don’t want to break the semantics of promises. Is there an opportunity to introduce a task type that is render blocking, but can be preempted if the browser needs that time?
  * Scott: What can run without breaking developer expectations?
  * Justin: We wouldn't be interested in that - we want them to opt in and choose a different priority.
  * Jason: Right, that is true. 
  * Scott: If the browser needs to do anything that isn’t rendering input, but I don’t know what that would entail.
  * Jason: Yeah, you wouldn't want that
  * Justin F: You might want to do the opposite.
  * Scott: The use case of wanting to do the flush is why it is not appealing to change the semantics of microtasks. For some, microtasks accrue and cause problems.
  * Justin R: We’ve run into this, where you need a microtask to break it.
  * Scott: Maybe you lessen the chance that that happens this way
  * Jason: It has interplay with the variable FPS, if the browser says we are going to 30, maybe the semantics of "please fire this before the next frame" for microtasks is too naive. For my own sake, if one were to use scheduler.postTask to implement a scheduler, would that be sub-optimal, because you don’t know how many tasks there are in the queue?
  * Scott: I think that is ok, I don’t think this is going to replace everyone’s scheduler. Some have more granular priorities, choosing when to yield is hard. I think it can be used within other schedulers, and add on to this. Hopefully this is the right kernel we can build on.
  * Scott: I will share my contact information.
  * Brian: Would you be interested in coming back, in a few months maybe to follow up and continue
  * Scott: Yes, sure.

#### Decorators

* Update from Justin F talking to v8 team
    * Justin F: I talked to Shu on V8 team, who gathered feedback from other implementers. I understand where the __ of the current proposal is, and how it relates to the __ proposal. The current proposal isn’t static enough. I think there is a path forward here where if we can express decorators mostly as things that are expressible as source transforms, so that a decorator implementation would never call Object.defineDecorator, and they are expressible by a tool or engine as a source transform. Last time Dan had talked about this in a smaller group to brainstorm ideas on decorators, but it didn’t come together.
    * Justin R: Does this make decorators metadata on top of class fields/class everything?
    * Justin F: They have semantics, so not just metadata. We want to reimagine the base set of things to do a transform.
    * Dan:sure, we should convene a smaller group, but Shu was already clear about this, and many people still don't like static decorators. The V8 team also suspects that it would be too complex and not worth it to do more static source transforms.. Let's convene a smaller group.
    * Justin F: I don’t know where we want to sign up for another discussion.
    * Rob E: Are they asking for something that is almost like a small macro language?
    * Justin F: That is almost what static decorators are if you squint just right - but I think an actual macro language is a step too far.
    * Dan E: I think they suspect that it wouldn't be worth it.They are not asking for anything in particular, just explaining that various things are unacceptable. See the full analysis [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GMp938qlmJlGkBZp6AerL-ewL1MWUDU8QzHBiNvs3MM/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GMp938qlmJlGkBZp6AerL-ewL1MWUDU8QzHBiNvs3MM/edit)
    * Justin F: I am more optimistic than the doc is that there is a solution, for those who go and read it later.

**Decorator Subgroup Signup**

* Justin Fagnani [justinfagnani@google.com](mailto:justinfagnani@google.com)
* Rob Eisenberg [rob.eisenberg@microsoft.com](mailto:rob.eisenberg@microsoft.com)
* Fred Kleuver [fred.kleuver@aurelia.io](mailto:fred.kleuver@aurelia.io)
* Michel Weststrate [mweststrate@fb.com](mailto:mweststrate@fb.com) (sorry, couldn’t make it tonight!)

**Links**

* [scheduler.postTask explainer](https://github.com/WICG/main-thread-scheduling/blob/master/PrioritizedPostTask.md)
    * Starts an Origin Trial in Chrome 82. This API has had more iterations than the others.
    * Links for learning more at the [bottom of the explainer](https://github.com/WICG/main-thread-scheduling/blob/master/PrioritizedPostTask.md)
* [scheduler.yield explainer](https://github.com/WICG/main-thread-scheduling/blob/master/YieldAndContinuation.md)
    * Not yet implemented, we’re working on it now.

**Discussion Topics**

We’d love to hear feedback and take questions on the APIs we’re working on, as well as hear about scheduling problems that folks experience — and what scheduling APIs might help address those problems. There’s a [section](https://github.com/WICG/main-thread-scheduling/blob/master/PrioritizedPostTask.md#post-mvp-api-areas-of-exploration) in the postTask explainer that details some of the problems on our radar, and it would be great to hear if these resonate with folks, and if there are other problems that are missing.
