March 21, 19:00 UTC

Attendees:

* Michel Weststrate
* Justin Ridgewell
* Josh Thomas
* Justin Fagnani
* Aki Braunm
* Minko Gechev
* Benjamin Coe
* Fred Kleuver
* Adam Bradley

Agenda and notes

* [Decorators](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/): Thoughts?
    * DE: New early draft decorators proposal, starts by filling all current decorators via typescript decorators
    * MW: Can’t maintain the exact same API, all use cases seem to be covered, though.
    * DE: All uses will have to change, ie importing `@dec`, so everyone will require at least a minimal codemod
    * JF: Only issue I can think of is cross-file compilation. Doesn’t this add a new phase?
    * DE: Decorators still run at runtime. This affects bytecode generation. More complicated from an implementation perspective, but this information will be available sooner so the bytecode can take advantage. Generation of bytecode has to wait until dependencies are loaded.
    * JF: Yah, that’s what I thought. This’ll require a bit of work, but this is exactly what we expect to have to do to get decorators through design.
    * DE: If instead of asking @computed, what if they used @tracked that passed in callbacks that they import from mobx.
    * MW: I think that’ll be unusable.
    * MG: This also adds grammar complexities.
    * JF: Should we just do full macros?
    * DE: I don’t know what that means. I think this is an extension point that we can use in the future for macros. This could be done later as the syntax for macros and let Babel/typescript compile them out.
    * JF: Kevin Smith has a sample repo with it.
    * DE: I think that decorating an expression is difficult, because how do you disambiguate the expression from the args to the decorator?
* Top-level await in modules
    * Blocks execution of modules that import the module that's awaiting
    * [Explainer](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await/)
    * Current plan: "siblings" in module import graph can be initialized in parallel
    * JF: I think this is a bad idea. As opposed to TLA, the thing that most of these modules are trying to do is to a two-phase initialization for modules. Like, run through the entire module graph, start the initialization that does aysnc, then do the sync module building after init.
    * DE: I think that is possible with this proposal.
    * JF: Say components that depend on other components, and these components have a top level await. Something….
    * DE: Can you submit this as an issue so we can discuss it?
    * DE: One change that we made is to make sibling imports run in parallel, so that we don’t have a large waiting from the child import up to the root.
    * JF: previous issues:
        * [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await/issues/5](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await/issues/5)
        * Alternative async initializers: [https://gist.github.com/justinfagnani/d26ba99aec5ffc02264907512c082622#async-module-initialization-1](https://gist.github.com/justinfagnani/d26ba99aec5ffc02264907512c082622#async-module-initialization-1)
    * JF: This changes the import order, right?
    * DE: This kicks off in sequence, and once you hit the first await, you start for the next one while this one waits. The HTML spec is pretty clear that the fetch happens first, then init, then evaluate. [Explaining promise.all and Root -> A and B, A -> a1 and a2].
    * JRL: How are later sync imports affected by a top-level await?
        * Import { a } from ‘a.js’
        * Await B
        * Import { c } from ‘c.js’
    * DE: A lot of people are interested in making the module graph async by default.
    * DE: Either `import await a` would discourage TLA, or it would make everyone always use `import await`.
    * JF: … something about html module …
    * DE: I don’t know enough about html modules to answer.
    * DE: the question here is whether you should be able to yield in the middle of execution. When we do have these things blocking,...
    * JF: Multiple script tags in HTML modules, those would yield in between executing
    * MW, AB: I haven’t ever needed this kind of feature
    * BC: If found when writing command line tools, there can be quite a bit of boiler-plate to await files loading, other async operations; makes for harder to read code samples (and just the code in general is a bit more clunky).
* HTML topics? Other topics?
    * If you have questions, feature requests, suggestions, etc. for HTML or other parts of the web platform, we could expand the scope of this call and bring in experts from those fields. Any interest[?](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/759)
    * [CSS Modules](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/759) - Justin Fagnani
    * HTMLElement - Adam Bradley
        * Extending a global HTMLElement within a server environment is difficult for both prerendering/SSR and unit testing. Would be interested to talk about various ways to not directly tie the global HTMLElement to a specific ownerDocument.
    * Microtasks - Fred Kleuver
    * SharedArrayBuffer -- what will it take to ship everywhere - Adam Bradley
* Controlling mutation of data structures
    * Does JS's mutable-happy model cause  problems?
    * Anything we should do to incrementally fix it?
        * Should "new things" be frozen by default (e.g., in modules)
    * Would it make sense to introduce a new sort of *deeply* immutable data type?
        * Additionally: what about deep equality?
    * [Operator overloading](https://github.com/littledan/proposal-operator-overloading/)/[extensible numeric literals](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-extended-numeric-literals)
    * Demonstrating tuples, records, frozen-class-record-things. More expensive equality operator that can do deep equality
    * MW: What happens when you create a record with a mutable object as one of the props?
    * DE: Each property would have to be a value type, not an object instance
    * MW: I work with immutable lib immer, would it be possible to do something similar, have a standard api to turn an mutable tree into an immutable (clone) at once?
    * DE: Maybe you could do that? You would recursively spread the props to make them immutable
    * JF: Are these shareable across heaps?
    * DE: Not really, it’d be really difficult. The implementation is hard to make a GC that spans different threads. Mozilla proposes typed objects that could be shared across workers, maybe if that is done we could make records shareable.
    * JRL: Being able to share these across the thread would be a huge improvement in WorkerDOM. The main slowdown we’re finding is that posting large messages across the threads takes a ton of time.
    * DE: [https://github.com/littledan/serializable-objects/](https://github.com/littledan/serializable-objects/) would this be solved by allowing serialization of the object?
    * JF: Not the perf issue, but it would allow …
    * JF: When creating a record of a class, is the prototype not mutable?
    * DE: No, they would still be mutable.
    * JF: What if you could prepare the class on the other side?
    * DE: That’s what serializable-objects does.
    * ??: I’m also interested in the benefits we can get from the performance
    * DE: I don’t think the type system tracking would be hard to do
    * JRL: Calling `Object(rec)` returns the same rec value?
    * DE: It returns a new object that’s immutable, but not a record.
    * MW: Did you consider using `obj = const { x: y }` like TypeScript? (link: [https://devblogs.microsoft.com/typescript/announcing-typescript-3-4-rc/](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/typescript/announcing-typescript-3-4-rc/), section "Improvements for ReadonlyArray and readonly tuples")
* Standard library
    * [JavaScript standard library](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-javascript-standard-library/) improvements
    * [Chrome i2e](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/03/kv-storage) for import-maps for polyfilling built-in modules
* Namespaced Class Members
* (Ben Lesh) Cancellation ideas: [ https://github.com/tc39/proposal-cancellation/issues/22](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=0&dest=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Ftc39%2Fproposal-cancellation%2Fissues%2F22)
