November 26, 2019

Attendees:

* Brian Kardell
* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Sven Sauleau
* Ujjwal Sharma
* Richard Gibson
* Rob Palmer
* Ilya Volodin

Agenda and notes:

* Full TC39 [October meeting notes now available](https://github.com/tc39/notes/tree/master/meetings/2019-10)
* December 2019 TC39 [agenda](https://github.com/tc39/agendas/blob/master/2019/12.md): Some selected items:
    * [Module attributes](https://github.com/littledan/proposal-module-attributes/) for Stage 1
        * Input from tools requested! [Issue](https://github.com/littledan/proposal-module-attributes/issues/22)
        * DE: <Summarizes> let's you create arbitrary key/value pairs. There was an issue with json modules - in tools based module systems they are widely supported.  In the web however, it was raised that this was a security issue if it was toggled by the mime type.  You would expect if you loaded json from a CDN and the CDN returned something with the JS MIME type, you would be running code when you werent expecting it. This proposal lets you add some of that metadata inline, but this wouldn't just be for specifying the type, it would be a general mechanism.  My understanding was that tooling was doing this in some way that it was in the module specifier or in external configuration - I thought this would be helpful and I'd like feedback from this group.  And if we did this, would people expect/want this "with type" thing to be used/necessary outside of the web as well.
        * US: Guy do you remeber how we were passing permissions down into secure-require and I was wondering how we could make this compatible with ES modules even - I think this could help.
        * GB: Yeah, the case here is require that is across security contexts and we needed meta data across those. What were they again?
        * US: core module capabilities that they were allowed to use
        * GB: Yeah, this treats it as a membrane that lets us move that kind of stuff.  To me this feels a little bit like an edge case.  We've got this expectation around json but what is special about json?  Maybe we are letting 1 thing dictate a whole bunch about modules, but we should have a holistic module system.
        * DE: I think this is a fundamental issue if you have a distributed module system where some execute code and some don't.
        * GB: Right, but these aren't the only concerns and it can skew our design if we only look at this.
        * DE: I think this is only one use case - there are a lot of options we can discuss here for a lot of use cases.  There are other properties we could imagine with these too -- SRI is interesting… CGS modules or even built in module polyfilling.  But, for tools, there were particular use cases selected. Sven, can you explain some?
        * SS: imagine you have a bundle loader which could be using multiple loaders.  You could specify this right in the source code instead of separately per configurations.  When you import something you could configure your bundler.
        * DE: Does that seem interesting to other people here?  
        * RG: It does, but I am not sure how it would be reflected here.
        * DE: Do you have some source of hesitation?
        * RG: No. How far beyond just ability to load non-ecmascript source modules did you want to take this
        * DE: I think think is really about arbitrary key/value pairs - just like in the case of specifiers it is up to the host how to deal with them.  It would make sense, just like with modules, to try to align on things for some things.  But things like TC53 might not care about any of this and might have some different interpretation of the pairs.
        * GB: So, you're looking for semantic/technical feedback - or use cases or ..?
        * DE: I would like this to be open-ended discussion
        * GB: I can add thoughts about the loader if that helps?
        * DE: I had one more specific question first: If we say for json modules that on the web they would be invoked like this - do you think you would convince your customizer to do the same everywhere or, is it an ergonomic problem or… would we add linter stuff?
        * IV: Yes, I think so -- but I guess it seems to leave this entirely to the engine running the code and I think that this could easily lead to fragmentation where different attributes wind up being so differently handled that your code is not portable at all anymore.
        * US: Yeah, I had similar concerns.  Maybe we could do that with type, but if it is just arbitrary and not defined at all, this would probably create interop problems
        * DE: My thinking is what we would encourage and do what we can to develop something similar and interoperable as best practices, but not formally in the specification. This would let browsers define a standard that others might follow.
        * IV: I feel like this will be used as an escape hatch for things like babel and webpack because it makes it just so easy to hook a new thing in there.
        * DE: Do you see that as worse than the config files we have now - because it is in the code?
        * IV: Configuration is meant to support a specific tool, but the code is meant to run in any environment.
        * SS: I see there are two separate concerns. You would ship to environments that don't mean anything - do we care? The other is if you have multiple envs or tools that do care, someone else might not care, how can it stay interoperable.
        * DE: OK, unrecognized types - richard helped come to the conclusion that unrecognized attribute keys, it's best to ignore them (see the issue).  Did you want to talk about loaders?
        * GB: Rob also mentioned - at the moment the module registry is very much keyed by url in the browser and node - if we add this, we have to potentially have some new deduping thing where those can be the URL + this metadata, so this creates some new challenges.  There's discussion in node around an API for unloading modules and being able to load them fresh from the fs -- if we have attributes, we have to ask new questions: Do we unload all of them, or one?  We could work this all into the pipeline to be sure - webpack does some of this now with querystring parameters… Rob asked about conditional exports, 
        * DE: I always imagined this wouldn't form part of the cache key, but I guess this is something we could specify.  If this is out of band, not part of the file, it seems like it is not part of the cache key?
        * SS: I am thinking it must be in the cache key - if you said it is in there with two types, you don't want to do that do you?
        * DE: we could say that you only get to decide once in a module graph, that is doable.
        * GB: The idea is that generally the imports match, or you would get some kind of mismatch error or something?
        * DE: For type, yes.  If signature based identity, for example, we might be ok with one of them containing or not - I think it would be embedder specific, but not part of the cache key
        * IV: I have two use cases that come to mind. Type - a long time ago when web optimization was harder ms came up with this thing where you could put javascript and css in the same file and then send it once but load it twice in the same cache.  I can imagine a thing where you could do a thing like that, perhaps. The other is lazy loading maybe?  Webpack could enable something like this where it could be loaded lazily in some case or not in another
        * DE: The semantics are like they are in the web where it is just checked.  That's what this is like too.
        * GB: So does the first one win?
        * DE: No.  The first requester would win as far as setting headers, for example, but it wouldn't win WRT the response because there's just no facility for error
        * GB: If you had a static import to a module, then later on a dynamic import to the same module with an integrity attribute would it be rechecked?
        * SS: Would module attributes for something like tooling - should it live in some sort of tooling conventions agreement where only tooling would agree on things at least - loaders, lazy loading.. I don't know, I'm just wondering if tooling shouldn't agree on some attributes?
        * DE: The question is 'is it always true, or do we expect some of these to move beyond just tools at some point'... it is a hard question
        * IV: The standardization across everything would be nice, of course, but it opens new doors for things that make sense in some contexts but not others. It introduces opportunities for new diverging support for attributes among engines and avenues for supporting features
        * DE: How is it different if the manifest is out of line or inline like this.  Don't you do this with these today - is it really different?
        * IV: Attributes are generic and embedded - the externalized things are used by specific tools.
        * DE: There are efforts at unifying configurations for tools and environments. If we took this out of line, I would still want to suggest that some of this should work across environments.
        * IV: If browsers started adding parts of webpack, for example, it would slow down webpack because they now have new issues with backcompat that they didn't have to worry about before.
        * GB: systemjs followed pretty much the same path. That wasn’t exactly a good path. Caching is especially important when different loaders are doing a lot of work. Sharing configs and loaders is a bigger question. It hasn’t been done in a satisfactory way before (by systemjs).
        * BK: question: code is text. If there are tool specific things, wouldn’t authors build stuff that externalize this? If your users face a tax for adding module attributes, would we develop tooling to automatically do it?
        * IV: it is easy enough to expand the shorthand into the longhand syntax. There isn’t specifically a problem with that.
        * SS: A tool can generate it.
        * BK: for use-cases outside of JSON modules.
        * IV: if you have a type specified but the final resolution is based of mimetype or accept header, what’s the point?
        * BE: for creating expectations for untrusted sources.
        * IV: it seems to be boiling down to trust. The type might not be appropriate: it’s probably just high-security vs low-security.
        * DE: no-execute: true
        * IV: that sounds very clear.
        * SS: not just a security issue. It’s a way to signal browser what to expect.
        * IV: you can do it over accept headers.
        * SS: you cannot use file extensions, even when it isn’t about security.
        * DE: what about tools outputting these? Will people never want to write it?
        * GB: people want to import stuff and have the expression make sense in ECMAScript.
    * [import.meta](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-meta/) for Stage 4
    * [Optional chaining](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-optional-chaining/) .? and [nullish coalescing](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-nullish-coalescing/) ?? for Stage 4
    * [Function implementation hiding](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-function-implementation-hiding) for Stage 3
    * [Standard Library Task Group](https://github.com/syg/standard-library-task-group)
* Further topics of interest
    * Stage of JSON modules on the web: [security issue](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/839)
    * [Decorators](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/) status update
        * DE: static decorators proposal, presented to TC39 last feb. Different from the one currently supported by transpilers. Unfavorable feedback, requires more design work. Open call for suggestions. Feedback for module-attrs should land in the GH repo.
* Meta
    * How do we get a good cross-section of tools authors?
        * DE: glad to have someone representing eslint, how to get more people and projects in here? Could use some help getting a more diverse group of individuals (based on projects).
        * IV: another rep of eslint is also the maintainer of babel, so we can have more babel representation, webpack is pretty open to collaboration.
        * DE: might have already invited them. Internal diversity from within the projects.
* For next time
    * Some of Mark Miller's stage 1 proposals
        * ["eventual send" for Promise pipelining](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-eventual-send)
        * [new syntax for Promise pipelining](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-wavy-dot)
