## August 25, 2020

## Attendees:
   - (uncaptured) 
   
## Agenda and notes:

#### July 2020 TC39 summary

* Many proposals reached Stage 4:
    * [NumericLiteralSeparator](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/2043)
    * [Intl.ListFormat](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-list-format)
    * [Intl.DateTimeFormat dateStyle/timeStyle](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-datetime-style)
    * [Promise.any & AggregateError](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-promise-any)
    * [WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/) reached Stage 4 but with [CleanupSome](https://github.com/codehag/proposal-cleanup-some) broken off into a separate Stage 2 proposal
    * [Logical Assignment](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-logical-assignment/)
* [Records and Tuples](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple) reached Stage 2; we're considering ways to enable references to objects
* [Cognitive dimensions of notation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OpKfS5UYgcwmBuejoSOBpbgsYXXzO0gG7GJHo65UXPE/edit#slide=id.p): A new idea for how to talk about the pros and cons of TC39 proposals
* [Intl.Segmenter](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter) reached Stage 3
* [Import Assertions](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-conditions) (was: module attributes) at Stage 2, hoping to propose for Stage 3 next meeting
* [Iterator Helpers](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-iterator-helpers) at Stage 2, approaching Stage 3 in the future
* [ResizableArrayBuffer and GrowableSharedArrayBuffer](https://github.com/syg/proposal-resizablearraybuffer) reached Stage 1
* [Async Context](https://github.com/legendecas/proposal-async-context) (like Zones/dynamic scope) again blocked from Stage 1
    * RB: I would love to have asked the folks who were blocking if they have ever used thread-local. If they have, why don't they feel async local makes sense in this case. I've had more than enough times when I would like to have this. The only alternative is passing parameters around, which is difficult iwth refactoring
    * DE: and it'd be great to pass around a cancel token this way, right?
    * RB: Cancellation is a specific thing. You might want the entire process to be cancellable, but this unit of work is not. If cancellation were ambient, I would have to defend against it all the time. It's more like, if I have an asynchronous lock, if I need to express that I own that.
    * DE: I wonder if being non-nested, like thread locals or Realms, could reduce the surface area of concerns.
    * RB: Well, variables are local… but this is a bigger discussion. I've used this related concept in C# [https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.asynclocal-1?view=netcore-3.1](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=0&dest=https%3A%2F%2Fdocs.microsoft.com%2Fen-us%2Fdotnet%2Fapi%2Fsystem.threading.asynclocal-1%3Fview%3Dnetcore-3.1) . The downside of async local is caveats: you have things like Promise.all, which run in parallel would be in the same async context, that could contend for the same resource. In .NET, there is a way to control that, to configure how await is handled. So if you have async-local data and configure await false, you don't have access to this data. So they had to add controls to give fine-grained control to whether things resume in the same synchronization context.

#### New decorators alternative

* Gist: [https://gist.github.com/littledan/c10bf2a0309a02330cb4ef931daef103](https://gist.github.com/littledan/c10bf2a0309a02330cb4ef931daef103)
* (Skip this section if everyone has already reviewed and given feedback)
* We've been reviewing this in the decorators calls, and considering bringing it to a TC39 meeting
* What do you think? (especially if you haven't been able to give feedback yet)
    * BMS: The file by file motivation would be really helpful/appealing to us. I would like to see what people would want to do with a linter if we had this.  I could imagine some scenarios where people create linter specific decorators to warn them.  I'm curious what people might do.
    * DE: That's interesting, in this case the decorator doesn't actually change anything.  I feel like a lot of use cases toward the middle actually change things. 
    * BMS: We're already very conservative about what we assume field access might do.  But, there are lots of cases where you might not want the runtime overhead of something that was only necessary statically.
    * DE: We've been investigating metadata use cases where a decorator might want to collect some metadata that would be read by someone else, but we weren't considering decorators for linters or static analysis. Is it better to use a magic comment or a decorator here
    * BMS: The trouble with magic comments is that they are non-standard and require you to come up with a whole scheme.  But, having a decorator option might be more ergonomic.  We might want to say "you could disable this rule inside this" with a decorator, and you'd know more with a decorator… I suppose you could even link out to other code that we might try to analyze statically that you couldn't be able to do with a comment. Like, if I wanted to say execute some function when it sees a message.  
    * DE: That particular case- it would be cool, but if it was a local function you could close over..
    * BMS: It would have to be pure, there would have to be a lot of constraints around it. 
    * DE: I'm just curious what kinds of constraints or patterns are your users comfortable using
    * BMS: People are endlessly creative, but right now they have to be JSON-serializable, but we've had requests for supporting functions for boolean logic or something.  Currently we redirect these.
    * DE: I wonder if these could be good use cases for annotations?
    * BMS: That's really interesting.  It could be really cool to have an eslint decorator for annotations.  <talks about @deprecated and possible use>
    * DE: I would hope there is nothing in this proposal you would want to lint against
    * BMS: For early stage features we would try to spec around.  If we saw something -- on a first read through, I didn't see any obvious footgun - we would say something.
    * CPO: As I mentioned before, it seems to work for us - the small detail is that we do a little bit of build time metadata structure and we use it out of band.  We dont have the requirement of having special ways of passing special metadata, other than that everything is looking good for us
    * DE: You mentioned this build step in the past and I was hoping that this proposal would give you the semantics at least
    * CPO: We decorate things for custom elements, but at runtime some of this data shouldn't be available.  We separate the public and internal parts with decorators, 'this is a property that reflects to an attribute'. That information can be extracted if we have access to the constructor, in our case we were not sure what decorators would offer so we build a build step that extracts this information and did this in a way that separates this.
    * DE: Do you need this anymore once you have private fields?
    * CPO: No, if this was supported everywhere - it will take a while for that to get everywhere
    * DE: In the hypothetical future then, where it is - what would you want from decorators?
    * CPO: That's why i think it is not critical for us to get the metadata structures we have from the decorators in the long run.
    * DE: Are there things you use decorators for besides this though?
    * CPO: We use them for 2 things really that are not related to describing the shape of the class..<?>
    * DE: So it sounds to me like the getter/setter pair/current proposal here would satisfy these?
    * CPO: We do some things with like, creating nice error messages - I guess we would lose some of that.
    * RBN: There is an interesting thing - I have a decorator that I built "autoproperty" that does getter/setter - I guess I wouldn't need this with this proposal, I would just have a decorator that does nothing.  C# has a thing like this - you can say: int Foo { get; set; } = 1; but JavaScripts aren't expressed in pairs like that.  There is going to be an interesting side effect that we will have to think about.  Because of the way fields work, if you …?... you could blow up the field with a decorator.
    * DE: I think linters could guard against that - it exists before this?
    * RBN: There's nothing in here that says "the field that exists in the base class - I want to decorate that, not replace it". I'll have to think about it some more..
    * DE: I wonder if there is a way we could add a typescript declare like thing as a comment that could allow you to decorate it?  Maybe as a separate follow on proposal?  It would make sense to add this to the 'future work' section of the proposal - both these things.
    * RBN: I'm not sure how that would work in a scenario where fields become accessors
    * DE: I think this could work just fine, maybe without the colon.
    * RBN: That's definitely a thing lint checkers could watch out for.  If you do this, it's probably not going to work the way you're thinking of it.
    * BMS: That is unfortunately a case that will be often hard for us to catch as it will generally be in a different file.
    * RBN: We designed this for this reason, so we could offer you errors.  This is a little like eslint comments
```
interface Foo {

  /* @get */ x: number;

}
```

   * BMS: We couldn't do it in core, but we could do it in TypeScript
   * RBN: We do it.
