April 28, 2020

Attendees:

1. Daniel Ehrenberg @ Igalia (DE)
2. John Lenz @ Google (JL) - Closure Compiler, et al
3. Kai Cataldo @ ESLint & Babel (KC)
4. Ujjwal Sharma @Igalia (USA)
5. Daniel Rosenwasser @Microsoft (DR) - Typescript
6. Bradford Smith @ Google (BSH)
7. Brian Kardell @ Igalia (BKL)
8. Fábio Santos (Terser) (FS)
9. Rick Button (RBU) @ Bloomberg
10. Ron Buckton
11. Richard Gibson @ OpenJS Foundation & Oracle (RGN)

Agenda and notes:

* Quick review of last meeting updates..
    * [WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/): Stage 3 update, iterated on some details, now [likely to ship soon in Chrome](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!topic/blink-dev/L04PqDk9eMU)
        * DE: (presents explainer)
    * [Record and tuple](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple): Stage 1 update, lots of proposed answers to open questions; please experiment with it in its playground
        * DE: (presents explainer)
        * JL: Has there been any feedback regarding performance concerns?
        * DE: Just for the complexity of adding new primitives. One of the concerns was how the keys are sorted. In the simplest implementation, they can be implemented the same way objects are,but programmers might expect some kind of structure sharing or other optimization. The question we have to answer: given that implementations will not be able to guarantee that the equality is always fast, is this still useful?
        * FS: The limitation to not being able to hold a reference to a mutable object is weird.
        * DE: It’s partly about, if you do have a reference to an object by accident.
        * FS: I agree, it would lead to bugs. 
        * DE: the note-takers are awesome.
        * JL: What about performance? Isn't performance a core goal?
        * DE: I’m working closely with the champions group. The goal is to allow implementations to make the best of this, but it’s not a goal to necessarily make everything faster. 
        * JL: object.observe was supposed to work along similar lines? I don’t want to go on about it.
        * DE: my knowledge about Object.observe is second-hand, but maybe we can follow up offline 
        * FS: maybe it a bad idea to say performance is good, 
        * RB: it would be really hard to put constraints like that. JavaScript has no concept of how much space an object can take.
        * DE: that’s one of the examples. Another reason is that structure sharing makes things much more nuanced. We want to allow engines to do those optimizations. If this gets too memory hungry, we’d need to look into it, but this really depends on the engines.
        * FS: it might be hard to specify.
        * DE: it’s not hard to specify, it’s just not 
        * RB: 
        * DE: define hash-consing.
        * RB: Hash consing is an optimization that makes equality comparison fast, usually constant time, by controlling the creation of values in a domain (where record is a domain of all record values), by ensuring that only one of a unique value is created. Usually this means that two equivalent values will always point at the same memory address, so comparison only requires a pointer check. The downside is that the extra computation required to create the values adds significant overhead.
        * DE: and this rests on it being deeply immutable. Any other questions?
    * [Optional chaining + private fields](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-fields/pull/301): Now can be used together, as `obj?.#x`
        * DE: *presents explainer* 
    * [Temporal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-temporal): Stage 2 update, lots of details narrowed down, prototyping/documentation review welcome
        * DE: *presents*
        * DE: A family of types. There's a polyfill, this is just a status update - stage 2, things are becoming more concrete.  I'd highly suggest people try it out and let us know what you think, give your thoughts/feedback.
    * [Number.range](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-Number.range/): New Stage 1 proposal, finally
        * DE: *presents explainer*
    * [Logical Assignment](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-logical-assignment): `a ??= b;` Reached  Stage 3
        * DE: *presents explainer*
        * DE: It's easy to implement, comparatively, I expect it will happen pretty quickly now that it is stage 3.  Not sure the value to tools? 
    * Decimal/operator overloading: Stage 1 status update; ongoing debate about operator overloading future
        * DE: *presents explainer*
        * DE: some people believe that it should happen *only *with operator overloading, others believe the opposite.
        * KC: can you speak more about the relationship between the two?
        * DE: that has everything to do with how primitive types work, and how one of the big things Decimal provides is using operators with Decimals.
        * DE: I do think we need to resolve this pretty soon because it is kind of holding back progress on Decimal.  There is some feedback - what do you think? 
        * JL: I’m curious why we’d go for Decimal as opposed to a third party library, possibly in WASM.
        *  DE: I created a survey, to see what people use, what they think about them, etc.  People expressed that they wanted better ergonomics, I think it would be good, but I am unsure as to how to quantify that.
        * JL: If folks want quality guarantees, there’s other ways on solving that.
        * DE: How so?
        * JL: better curation. It’s certainly less implementation overload.
        * DE: so far, I haven’t seen any investment from them, but it’s not their responsibility. It’s just something that a lot of JS developers feel excited about. I have no rubrics to judge this on, the jury is split on this one.
        * FS: I find the relationship with operator overloading kind of weird.  It's a bit hard to analyze a lot of code
        * DE: true, we cannot guarantee that. But this can be limited to the lexical scope, and it works well, since you can only apply that for a part of code that requires that. 
        * FS: I didn't have time to read the proposal, I'll study up for next time.
        * BSH: I thought that at least for some operations you need more information than just the operands? 
        * DE: that’s … you just need to use a static method and use an options bag. It’ll be useful to programmers to just use operators, so I’m looking for feedback. One thing we can do is have better default values. 
        *  BSH: There has been discussion about whether we should have infinite precision or you could have 128-bit and we don't need infinite. I thought we were leaning toward 128, but what is your impression/thoughts.
        *  DE: I think we should investigate this more before deciding.
        *  BS: what kind of investigation do you have in mind? What will you do to make this decision?
        *  DE: Write polyfills and documentation and let developers use them and get feedback… Actual data and experiment.  We want to investigate the paths in parallel because there are tradeoffs.  Better than making a decision too early.
        * BS: did you survey yield a list of people who are uncomfortable about this?
        * DE: yes, we had a great response, but we need broader feedback.
        * BKL: once we have the competing polyfills ready, we can utilize these. In the meantime [https://tiny.cc/js-decimal-survey](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=0&dest=https%3A%2F%2Ftiny.cc%2Fjs-decimal-survey)
        * BS: are people working on these? 
        * DE: at Igalia, me and Caio are working on both of these, yes.
        * BSH: I'm curious, since you linked them: If decimal were already done, would you still be as interested in overloading?
        * DE: that’s a question that exists on different levels. For one, how could this work? Secondly, how to add this to JavaScript. One thing I’m thinking about is how to add this operator overloading to JavaScript. There are non-decimal related use-cases though.  Whether these meet the bar for whether we add this to JavaScript is unknown yet.
        * BSH: I am inclined against operators because it will add complexity and make it really hard to statically analyze code.  It seems like a feature that looks nifty, but doesn't really provide much benefit.
        * DE: so lexical opt-in is not good enough for you 
        * BSH: That helps with static analysis, but why add the complexity of operator overloading at all? I just don't see that operator overloads add much benefit.
        * DR: There’s also some pushback from people in our team who worked on overloading in C#, who said that if they could remove operator overloading in C#, they would. 
        * RBU: C# developers have mostly steered away from using operators for things they normal operations don’t represent, unlike C++ whose standard library co-opted shift operators for console input/output
        * DE: C++ is getting worse at this, a lot of JavaScript developers have expressed concerns about that. One thing is that you can only overload operators on new classes, not existing ones.
        * RBU: The proposal I’m working on for struct/value types defines syntactic operator overloading that limits the operands to being other value types, so you could define a + between Decimal and Number, for example, but not Decimal and Map.
        * DE: that’s quite similar to this proposal, only that this proposal only covers classes that have operator overloading. 
        * BSH: Closure compiler doesn't support transpiling BigInt; we will just warn users of BigInt when their requested output mode is < ES_2020. We would probably do the same for Decimal.
        * DR: we do the same thing in TypeScript
        * DE: and how does that make you feel, Daniel? 
        * DR: it was a little funny, but the truth is that nowadays most runtimes support this. I guess just supporting the standard is a good step for most.
        * RB: on the Bloomberg side, TypeScript support for bigint is very helpful for us.
        * DE: So overall, does this have any implications for Decimal?
        * DR: On the TypeScript side of things? If you need to add a built-in type, it’s okay. It’s not ideal, but you have to move forwards in one way or the other. It’s just growing pains.

 

* Module Attributes (skipped for time)
* Decimal/Operator Overloading (skipped for time)
* Integration of ES transforms and the packages which need them (Fábio Santos)
    * FS: *explainer* - they all have to be plugged into one another. It's more of a user space thing but it is very hard to configure it all.  I created a gist about this: [https://gist.github.com/fabiosantoscode/94c3585db3c48cda77a822edf8471716](https://gist.github.com/fabiosantoscode/94c3585db3c48cda77a822edf8471716) .  It's just about adding pluggability of tools.  I have a solution in mind, but I'd rather ask you what you think… Is this something that should be done by TC39, or this needs to be something tackled outside TC39 space?
    * DR: It sounds like it is explicitly not TC39 to me, but I'm not sure it matters: If you have something in mind and you can get momentum, the blessing of a committee or something seems orthogonal to me and you should run with it if you want. It does remind me of visions from like ES3, but eventually tools diverged away from this because their own specific needs or accidents of history even.
    * FS: this is mostly all about plugging things. I agree that it doesn’t need to be done at a TC39 level, but it’ll be nice if Node.js, for example, would be pick things up just by adding a bunch of modules.
    * DE: I thought this call would be a good place for this discussion not really because I thought it would be good for TC39, but because we have a lot of tooling people here who it would seem to matter to.  One way that we try to coordinate between tools is through TC39, but maybe we lean to hard on that. When it comes to modules, for example, they were supposed to unify things but it's been harder than that.
    * KC: I can jump in a little bit on ESTree. ESLint follows ESTree, and we’re stuck right now because we cannot spec out some of the things. Currently, there’s a big effort to move ahead with this, but it has been a challenge and blocked progress before. But I agree that a coordinated effort like this is great, since I work on conflicting AST. 
    * DE: There is also the binary AST proposal which does add a standard AST - think there is still some degree of work on that.. Sven do you know more? 
    * SS:  Babel used to implement features pretty early in the stages.  The issue is that if we rely on ESTree or something, we will wind up just conflicting all the time because if we want to implement something early and others don't - what do we do?
    * FS: It doesn't have to be an AST necessarily - it could be a function signature, for example. For example, you could have a tool like React Storybook - currently it is very tightly coupled to webpack just because people have to add their little unique configuration to their modules just so they compile.  It would be great, I think, if you could add metadata to express this file requires this transpilation and so on. Something like Svelte which employs a completely different compilation step is really hard to integrate with something like JSDoc.
    * zDR: From our perspective we feel a lot of the problems you are describing - specifically with Svelte or Vue as examples - it feels like it should work fine, but there are all of these friction points.  Part of it is that there are a lot of assumptions that don't compose over time.  If your transform is just string to string, I dont know necessarily what there is except for a community demand on each tool that asked for a string to string - we have done this on the TypeScript side - but it does get more complicated than that.  I guess I just don't know necessarily how that would help the configuration problem at this point. Maybe there is something that is not clear to me there.
    * FS: I think that you get it, and that this could also be done at the community level. My original idea was kind of a standard file type that everyone could read.  You could do something like a babel macro that only uses standard ECMAScript syntax.
    *  DR: Interesting. There are tools like Closure and TypeScript which don't just compile… so is the idea just a file with a small well known set of options and you could specify other stuff?
    *  FS: I agree cross module things would not work well.  Everyone would wind up with their own little implementation of a bundler that is broken in some way.
    * DE: It sounds important for types to have cross module things.
    * DR: Even if you give us an entrypoint, we pull transitive dependencies in - you need that to do real analysis.  Compositionality is a hard problem.. Recently someone had a problem with the in-editor thing for Vue was doing something, and someone wanted to use TypeScript -- it just wasn't quite right which was unfortunate. There are still a lot of problems there, and we still don't have something that JustWorks - trying to figure out some way to bring these things together before we have well working solutions might be an issue long term.  I'd like to hear others' input.
    * DE: We are at time, how do we want to follow up this discussion - comments in the gist? Bring it back next month?
    * DR: I can respond in the gist, I can respond to ideas I guess.
    * KC: I do think that some kind of discussions about "standards across projects" or something is valuable and useful
    * BSH: I agree.
