
October 27, 2020

Attendees:

* Bradford C. Smith (BSH, Google closure-compiler)
* Richard Gibson (RGN, OpenJS Foundation)
* Rajat (RK, Netflix, UI Foundation Team)
* Ron Buckton (RBN, Microsoft)
* Fábio Santos (FáS, Terser)
* Devon Govett (DG, Parcel)
* Tobias Koppers (webpack)
* Brandon Mills (BM, ESLint)
* Nicolò Ribaudo (Babel)
* Will Binns-Smith (WB, Parcel)
* Lukas T
* Bradley Farias
* Yehuda Katz
* Yoav Weiss (YW, Google Chrome)
* Fred Schott (FS, Snowpack, Skypack)
* Leo Balter (LEO, Salesforce)

Agenda and notes:

* Bundling: It'd be cool if ES modules could be shipped and executed natively, right? Tools could perform further optimizations, but might not be needed to get things to work, in the long term (?) A few possible approaches:
    * [Web Bundles](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1yEwfXIYuuMJbT6qst6cBFGaTaEANjtrSA_hL69xTk7M/edit): a bunch of grouped HTTP responses
        * WBS: Prior art on only loading what the client needs: "Negative Loading"
            * https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mGENRKrdoGY
            * [https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Q44eWLI2qvZnmCF5oD2jCw-FFql9dYg36FE5CpbMlw4/preview?slide=id.g2e9f656a_0_25](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Q44eWLI2qvZnmCF5oD2jCw-FFql9dYg36FE5CpbMlw4/preview?slide=id.g2e9f656a_0_25)
        * [https://www.notion.so/Same-Origin-Web-Bundles-1226117dca7c4aaf8e2d3a2df7171dea](https://www.notion.so/Same-Origin-Web-Bundles-1226117dca7c4aaf8e2d3a2df7171dea) 
    * Somehow making HTTP faster so it's not expensive to have tons of individual JS modules??
    * Realizing that, actually, there's no problem to solve, and tools are fine
    * DE: Is this an important problem to solve?
    * BS: We (closure-compiler) currently have to output a giant script, but this is not great. It would be great if we could output modules that could link each other in.
    * JHD: It's important for modules to be able to statically import each other
    * FS: If we can put the critical stuff on top, get it to parse first, and then put the non-critical stuff below an await, it can be valuable to have the browser parse it as it comes in and execute it as it comes in
    * DE: Note that executing non-atomically is a separate proposal, which Yoav is working on. Let's queue talking about this to the end.
    * YW: What I have in mind for Web Bundles is that the delivery mechanism is decoupled from ES modules, enabling the delivery of multiple named and URL resources, which gives us the compression benefits of bundling, with the IPC and performance benefits of bundling, but with individual caching and sharing of resources between bundles. This would let bundles have its own resources which are atomic. I have a proposal for dynamic subsetting of bundles.
    * DE: JavaScript module bundles vs WebBundles
    * BS: I was picturing JavaScript module bundles for Closure Compiler
    * LT: I think it could be great to have Web Bundles, so you can bundle images too, and not just 
    * YW: There would be a digest that would allow the server to dynamically discard resources that the client already has in the cache.
    * DE: This is a different aspect, and it can simplify how chunking works inside of bundles.
    * RK: We have a server-side bundle subsetting at Netflix. You make a request and we give you a part of the dependency graph. If you make a subsequent request, it gives you just what you need, as you say what you have. My request is able to specify, I know I have this, and exclude this.
    * BS: Google also has something kinda similar, a key part of serving our biggest projects that allows code in the browser to say, "I need these chunks". It seems like this is serving a need that would be applied to lots of things. This is talking about HTTP, not TC39?
    * DE: This is neither HTTP nor TC39; it's a new resource type that we'd have logic in the fetch spec.
    * YW: Maybe there would be a new HTTP header, but it's not core HTTP
    * FáS: Also maybe use Etags?
    * YW: Easier to make a new header type. We're wondering, how this would work for you, how this would integrate with bundlers that you are working on, making sure it all fits together.
    * FS: If I can take off my snowpack hat and put on skypack--this is an esm cdn. This is one thing we've been seeing on that side--a way to deliver packages by URL. We're trying to figure out a good way to deliver one package that has n dependencies. We can do our best with preload headers, but we are trying to figure this out, as we're hitting browser bottlenecks, even with H3. I want to load each things with URLs, and cache them with the URL that they would've hit.
    * FS (chat): if Skypack is new to you, more info here:[ https://skypack.dev/](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=2&dest=https%3A%2F%2Fskypack.dev%2F)
    * DE: I'm interested in hearing more, both about this subsetting question, and on whether people are interested in bundling non-JS resources
    * TK: +1 for a general solution instead of just ESM
    * BS: I'm working on the closure compiler, but this woul
    * DG: Images and CSS are definitely important
    * BM: Putting on an application developer hat, it would be great to have a solution for all the assets we need, CSS and images in particular
    * BS: What does this have to do with TC39?
    * LEO: We can find a solution where we don't need TC39 if it's the right solution. I'm really excited to find a way that we can find a map of modules that we want. I'm really interested in finding reloading over that.
    * JH: Bundling is still valuable in Node. I think it would be very useful to have outside of JS as well
    * RK (chat): +1 to Jordan's comment
    * DE: Node and other JS environments could use non-JS-specific bundles if we do it right, couldn't they?
* Hook into the ESM module loader
    * Expire a module from the cache (especially for Hot Module Replacement)
    * FS: Snowpack is a very standards-focused approach to app development. I'm going to reduce what other bundlers do--don't take offense. Webpack, parcel, etc ship a module system to the browser, letting them control things that browsers don't give you hooks for. This lets them do things like push hot updates to the code. Webpack is able to communicate with a client and server component, letting them swap in one individual file, enabling HMR (hot module replacement). We instead literally use ES modules, with entrypoints by URLs, so then the problem becomes: how do you update a file that has changed? We ship support for this, and it works, but it's more fickle/limited. What we do is rotate the URL to trigger a new fetch. Then, every update is an entry in the ESM cache, so the code continues to live in the browser! People end up refreshing often enough that memory pollution / abandoned modules have not been reported as an issue (but theoretically is problematic). We're working around limitations to updating individual items. 
    * FS: To push an update to one module also means pushing an update to all dependents (parents) since they need to update to reference the new module.
    * LEO (chat): Fred had just described what I wanted to ask for in this meeting
    * YW: I worked on a CDN in a previous life. CDNs have a caching scheme that works quite well, which we called hold-til-told (?). Your resource has an infinite lifetime in the cache, until we purge it, and then it can be replaced with a newer version of the resource. This works well for some workflows, where you have bugs, typos, etc. We want things to be immutable, but then we want to get rid of them. I've been thinking about how to bring this kind of caching to the browser. This sounds related--I don't have a solution--this seems like a generic problem beyond modules. You have a specific ESM problem about the module map, but there are important general things.
    * LT: I don't think you can unload a module, since if it has event listeners, etc, they can't just disappear. What you can change is, if it is imported again, then what happens.
    * FS: Part of it is that you pollute the namespace--webpack and parcel handle this today--we're just talking about bringing this to ESM
    * LT: The other issue is, what if you replace it with something with a different signature?
    * DE: Or a top-level await!
    * FS: If there were a way to replace a module and somehow hook into a loader--systemjs has this. Evan You and Preact collaborated on something recently. It's an idea about how to make HMR work in a more general environment ([https://github.com/snowpackjs/esm-hmr](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=0&dest=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fsnowpackjs%2Fesm-hmr)). This would be less bundle-specific and more around the browser.
    * DE: Do you ever see people use some code, then do a SPA kind of navigation, not use code anymore, and then have too much memory usage?
    * FS: That's a theoretical issue. The only thing we see is when people try to load 6k modules--many-small-modules is still bottleneck at the Chrome level
    * BF: I've seen memory pressure build up this way in Node with the existing APIs.
    * FS: A lot of HMR is on the client to configure--the hooks that ESM HMR let the client clean things up. So it's more about letting you do this if you know what you are doing.
* Inlining JS modules
    * JS module blocks: Inline JS modules to run in a separate worker or Realm [https://github.com/surma/proposal-js-module-blocks](https://github.com/surma/proposal-js-module-blocks) 
    * DE: for workers, Realms
    * TK: Do data urls already cover that?
    * RBN: module [no line terminator here] { syntax issue enforces a particular coding style
    * JH: Prettier and ESLint already prefer curlies on the same line to prevent the `return\n{...}` mistake. Allman style (braces on own line) is rare in the ecosystem.
    * DE: Prior proposal: JS module bundles with named modules ([extremely rough gist](https://gist.github.com/littledan/c54efa928b7e6ce7e69190f73673e2a0))
    * DR: One pain point with existing approaches in TypeScript is having to compile two bundles, one with DOM types and one with Worker types. Having multiple different global scopes depending on location within one file could be unintuitive. TypeScript currently has no notion of multiple global scopes.
    * DG (chat): +1 same for us generating different runtime code for different environments
    * ??: Could we reduce that pain point by putting the inline module within the Worker constructor?
