## September 29, 2020

## Attendees:

* Bradford C. Smith (BSH, Google closure-compiler)
* Brian Kardell (BMK, Igalia)
* Devon Govett (DG, Parcel)
* Leo Balter (LEO, Salesforce)
* Maia Teegarden (MTN, Parcel)
* Brandon Mills (BMS, ESLint)
* Richard Gibson (RGN, OpenJS Foundation)
* Will Binns-Smith (WBS, Parcel)
* Rick Button (RBN, Bloomberg)
* Sven Sauleau (SSA, Babel)

## Agenda and notes:

* [September 2020 TC39](https://github.com/tc39/agendas/blob/master/2020/09.md) summary
    * [Decorators](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators) update: New proposal presented; people had interesting feedback but no "existential" concerns as in previous proposals. Plan is to prototype for six months at least. Please join the calls if you're interested.
        * BSH: One of our concerns in the closure compiler is being able to statically analyze the code. I can see that the methods have certain properties, decorators introduce some uncertainty there. If you decorate a class, the class you can see gets passed into the function, but I don’t know for certain that the class has the shape of the original class. I can’t trace down where that decorator is necessarily. They need to know that when a class is a certain way that it stays that way at runtime.
        * RB: TS’s stance on this since stage 1 decorators, is that whatever -- we want TS to maintain the shape of the class, so that means that we are likely to enforce that whatever constructor you return or class you return has to be a subtype of the class that went in, so that you can’t do shenanigans where you replace a class with something not a subclass. Anything else would require us to retool a significant portion of the compiler. We will have to see how this works and how the community adopts it. We think the best uses of constructor replacements are limited.
        * DE: Should we consider not allowing class decorators? There’s also no great solution for some of this. In this kind of case, how can we let the decorator see the static field and the class that is the output of the decorator. I was wondering if we should ban replacing the class.
        * BSH: With the alternative being that it has a wrapper around the constructor function, but can’t replace the class?
        * DE: I don’t know.
        * BSH: I like the idea. If what you are thinking is, the decorator of the class, the return value doesn’t replace the thing it isn’t decorating, instead add extra fields … etc.
        * DE: 
        * BSH: That seems workable.
        * DE: Does your static analysis concern involve anything other than replacing the class? 
        * BSH: It does to some extent. If you were to wrap a method and change the arguments, for example, that would be problematic.  
        * DE: Yeah, I guess if the type system can see the function you are using to wrap the class. 
        * BSH: The problem is we don’t have all the code to analyze all at once. You might not be able to see the decorator.
        *  DE: What about the strategy ron described?
        * BSH: We can always just assume it, and break assumptions, we do that already with Closure, and don’t want to if we don’t have to. 
        * RBN: Part of this is that there are two major use cases for class decorators, registration pattern where I take a class and add it to a WeakMap for dependency injection, the other one is "I would like to augment this class to treat it as a sealed class". That requires evaluation in the constructor. Class decorators need to be able to see --- , that does allow you to add members. The upside is that it is roughly equivalent to any subclass, from a shape perspective you can change the shape of things. In the type system we enforce that the values are a subtype, if I have a method that returns a string | number, you can return just a string. We have to be cognizant of the fact that this is JS and you can do bad things anyways.  Do we think that people will do the right thing in general or do we think that people will just go off the rails all the time.  I imagine that the people who will use it most will be library authors, etc and they will be careful.
        * DE: And you think that ..?
        * RBN: There are certain things you can't do with decorators that you can only do with mixins. 
        * DE: I'm wondering if the nature of ..?
        * RBN: There are other cases, constructor replacement as a way to create a callable constructor, where it looks like a subclass, but has call semantics.
        * DE: I think you could allow this call constructor pattern without allowing everything else right?
        * RBN: One of the biggest advantages is that you can do before the constructor call and after. So you could do a parameter evaluation before, or I could see something that freezes the class after super.  My concern is if we do something that is only constructor injection we have to do more, it complicates the API.  It makes it work differently than method replacement as proposed.
        * DE: that is true. Do other people have comments here? We can continue in both the issue tracker and the biweekly decorators meetings.
    * [Import assertions](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-assertions): Reached Stage 3. Note that import assertions cannot be used to reinterpret the module, but only check things about it
        *  DG: I opened an issue last week. My main confusion was whether the categories of metadata needed to be separate syntactically, and whether that is too limiting. Maybe it would be better to have a single keyword, it's more extensible. I'm not too concerned if it needs to be there, but ti's just something I noticed. We're interested in several categories of things here not related to assertions.  Preload/prefetch hints - others use magic comments.  We thought real syntax would be maybe a better approach to that problem.  Then asset references proposal opened long ago, stagnant. We need to do something like import an image and get a URL for it - we thought this could be related. Then, of course, providing different transformations to diff types - options to compile JS or resize an image.
        * DE: My impression so far is that those all make sense with the "with" transformation. --- The reason with and assert are moving separately, is because we want to make it clear that assertions don’t transform the module. What do you think?
        *  DG: Preloading doesn’t transform the module, just gives you a hint. It could be made to fit in the "with" thing, but doesn’t fit that distinction. I was wondering if there were further use cases that we would use that syntax for.
        * Sven: The with keyword isn’t stage 3 yet, only assertions are stage 3.
        * Will: Everything on the right hand side of with is free for us to do with? The language wouldn’t prevent certain properties on the rhs?
        * DE: It’s restricted in that it currently only has strings for values. We could extend it to other things, but we need to explain how complex the grammar should be. In an earlier draft we allowed arbitrary complex constants, but there are a lot of distinction points.
        * Will: For us, everything boils down to influencing how things are interpreted, or how things are preloaded.
        * DE: When I was proposing it be considered a transform, I was thinking it would be transformed into a thing where you could call a method to get the contents of the module. It is like a dynamic import, but dynamic import is too late. With dynamic import, how do you know ahead of time that you should fetch that? The goal is "what can we get to ship in browsers". If it requires static analysis, it won’t ship in browsers, but if it is really statically available it might be more possible. What do you think about that as an evolutionary path?
        * Will: I think that if the stuff on the rhs is open, having it be open there allows us in the bundler space to explore this and figure out what our users want, and then take that and formulate something that is more generally useful in the browser.
        * DE: That sounds great. As  Sven mentioned, the "with" is not proposed in TC39. We would need to bring it to committee to get it into Babel. Would some people here be interested in working on this? We could work together on this for the Jan TC39 meeting?
        * DG: Happy to help.
        * Will: Likewise.
        * DG: To one point that you made about string literals, at least numbers and booleans would be useful for us. For numbers, you want to import an image and resize it, booleans are useful for turning on or off options.
        * Will: It would be nice for stuff like conditional bundling, an object representation would be useful there, but I’ll write that up.
        * DE: These are interesting ideas, I’m interested in learning more about the bundling space and how we can include that. Having these use cases written up will be really useful. 
        * Sven: One of the concerns is that other vendors creating their own attributes with "with", we might end up with way too many options. 
        * DE: One thing that Sven and I prototyped, was explicitly coordinating across users of module attributes what they meant. We ended up just standardizing "type" in TC39. Maybe we should revisit that effort. I don’t think TC39 would be the venue for that but maybe another 

    * [Records and Tuples](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple): "Box" may be possible for references to objects. Monthly calls planned; please let me know if you're interested
        * RB: I have a proposal that seems to have a lot of similarities/overlap with your box.  I'm wondering if there is possibility for coordination.
        * RBN: Yes, it seems a little different but let's work together.  There is a monthly call, you can come to that, or you can open an issue if you prefer or can't attend.  If anyone is interested an isnt a delegate, please reach out to me or dan. 

    * [Built-in modules](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-built-in-modules/): didn't advance due to Chrome+Mozilla concerns about some things being globals and other things being modules
    * This tooling call is officially a TC39 thing, but note that participating in this call doesn't attribute any special status to attendees (we're just chatting here, and you can join TC39 by joining Ecma or being an invited expert), and that we don't create proposals here (that's done on GitHub).
* [Import "evaluator" attributes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-assertions#follow-up-proposal-evaluator-attributes): A separate `import with` syntax to change send parameters influencing how modules are interpreted. Is anyone interested? If so, let's talk.
* Bundling: It'd be cool if ES modules could be shipped and executed natively, right? Tools could perform further optimizations, but might not be needed to get things to work, in the long term (?) A few possible approaches:
    * JS module bundles? ([extremely rough gist](https://gist.github.com/littledan/c54efa928b7e6ce7e69190f73673e2a0))
    * [Web Bundles](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1yEwfXIYuuMJbT6qst6cBFGaTaEANjtrSA_hL69xTk7M/edit): a bunch of grouped HTTP responses
        * WBS: Prior art on only loading what the client needs: "Negative Loading"
            * https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mGENRKrdoGY
            * https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Q44eWLI2qvZnmCF5oD2jCw-FFql9dYg36FE5CpbMlw4/preview?slide=id.g2e9f656a_0_25
    * Somehow making HTTP faster so it's not expensive to have tons of individual JS modules??
    * Realizing that, actually, there's no problem to solve, and tools are fine
