January 28, 2020

Attendees:

* Bradford Smith
* Brian Kardell
* Ron Buckton
* Dan Ehrenberg
* Rick Button
* Richard Gibson

Agenda and notes:

* December 2019 TC39 meeting [notes](https://github.com/tc39/notes/tree/master/meetings/2019-12). 
Highlights:
  * Optional chaining and nullish coalescing got to Stage 4!
  * Operator overloading presented for Stage 1	
  * Module attributes presented for Stage 1
  * Lots of standard library features under development; ironing out language corner cases in the language
  * TC39 considering incubation subgroup and remote plenaries
  * Not presented, but offline discussion:
      * Private fields coming to TS 3.8
      * Continued discussion on decorators
* [Realms](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-realms) and [SES](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-ses/)
    * Realms brings multiple globals, like Node vm module or same-origin iframes
        * BSH: We're putting code in strings again. That's a problem--that's always a problem 
        * DH: It’s just a script tag, like in an HTML document. Does that make it OK? We could check to see if something is a literal via template tags.
        * BSH: That kind of thing makes the compiler's life very hard - this is better than eval() but it is still problematic
        * DH: That's a good point. Can you think of any ways this could be mitigated
        * BSH: If the syntax didn't rely on a string - if it was a syntax feature, it would be better
        * RBN: The thing I want to use this for is plugins - I imagine you wouldn't be using string literals here, you'd use separate files that are optimized
        * BSH: The compiler wants to see the whole world.
        * DE: Have you heard of the trusted types proposal? You could check whether something was a string literal - if we could use some version of that - imagine we had that in the language - will this be a good mitigation?
        * BSH: If you are passing string literals, people will want to build up a value and interpolate - and that's where we get lost and run into trouble, it’s too obfuscated from the compiler.  
        * RB: Could we do it more like web workers where they were limited to different source files somehow?  They take a module or script to load in the constructor and they're async.  It would require some async coordination like a promise to wait for it to load
        * DE: This is an interesting idea. We mentioned having an API where you could load a module specifier in that realm, as opposed to paths.
        * BSH: How would this look? The compiler would need to see both things, and it would have to ??  
        * RB: If this were build time only you could pass in a reference to the (separately) compiled thing
        * BSH: I think we are talking past one another a little bit - I dont think I've explained well what the problem actually is… The problem is that the compiler wants to do things like say "variable X is never used, I want to remove its definition." But if I am going to do that, I need to be able to _see_ statically at compile/build time all the uses.  
        * DE: How do you handle dynamic import
        * BSH: We don't at this time.
        * DE: One of the solutions we've been talking about is loading a script into a worker - do you support that?
        * BSH: Right now, it has to work by loading things into basically one big script
        * DE: I don't think it would be possible to do that with this - maybe some special block?  Whenever you have a literal, that is evaluated in the current realm.  Even if it is in a closure that returns a new function every time, it will inherit the current realm.  But, I was hoping it could still be analyzable similarly to how RB was saying - are you saying that wouldnt work?
        * BSH: Right now, it wouldn't.  The final end output from the compiler is one giant script - trying to change to something else would not be easy - not impossible… But it's a little aside from the point - the point is we need to see all of it and if we weren't putting things in strings, we can analyze it.
        * BK: So, I think what I hear you saying is that the trouble is that string can be dynamic and then the only way you can know what's in it is to run it, and round and round.
        * BSH: Yes, that's basically the problem.  We could say it could only be a literal, but if it is a literal what is the point of using a string at all?
        * DE: Dynamic import supports runtime strings, where it could probably work with just a constant string that isn’t a runtime value. It is a runtime string because there isn’t another alternative. There are tools that are able to handle the "constant" case.
        * BSH: I like SES because it helps with a current problem which is that we can't tell what the globals really are - that they haven't been mucked with.
        * DE: …. If we freeze object.prototype - then things that would have worked before, don't. This comes up a lot in ES5 style class declaration that is still used. There are some kinds of potential exotic fixes that we probably dont want to go into now… So if you take it that like, with modules, there are some kinds of upgrade issues…

    * SES adds a single frozen global, which you can build off of multiple times; avoids unwanted interference through the built-in objects
        * BSH: The SES seems to be more what I am looking for, it doesn't seem to have this problem?
        * DE: They seem complimentary - SES is deeply frozen, it isn't compatible with current JS - but it is still based on evaluating a string. It can be useful if you have two realms but you dont want them to interact with each other. Some people think this could be a useful security boundary.
        * BSH: The SES would help us because it can't determine what the globals are - we don't know that they haven't been mucked with

    * SES is at Stage 1; Realms at Stage 2
* [Operator overloading](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-operator-overloading) and [BigDecimal](https://github.com/littledan/proposal-bigdecimal)
    * RB: I am both really looking forward to it as  a developer, and really dreading it as someone doing a transpiler.  Because of the fact that JS isn't statically typed, any operator, if you have a with declaration has to first go through some mechanism.  A function to define a base class isn't statically analyzable - too many ways to change it.
    * DE: There's no way to pass an object into the constructor to…
    * RB: No that's not what I am saying… Let me explain my concern. If you're relying on an object that you pass to 'ops' and that object can be created so many ways - they become almost impossible to statically analyze in a typed language (e.g., `const DecimalOperators = Operators(Object.assign({}, {"+"(a, b) { … }}))` ).  If instead I had something like a class with a static/unambigious syntax..
    * DE: I'm not sure if you saw the proto spec - there is an internal slot.. It's ok for an object to get more private names during its lifetime.  The superclass can return whatever it wants to - I can show you short code samples.
    * RB: I just don't see why a static class idea can't give you all of that
    * DE: I am not at all opposed to having a way to do this, as you pointed out on the issues, it avoids hazards that exist otherwise.  It's a very nice syntax, but it has expressions in expressions - we'll have to think about it more.  I like the idea of a literal syntax -- what if we had both a literal and a dynamic syntax?
    * RB: If we have a static syntax, I wouldn't see the value in the expression based syntax.  You could use a mix-in type approach to meet more dynamic use cases.
    * RB Demonstrates mixin based approach:
        * Static operator example[1]:
    * DE: --- 
    * DE: The instance is created in the base class constructor. how does the instance know to include the operators from the subclass?
    * RB: I’d have to look at the reference for the super return hack, but IMO it shouldn’t affect it.
    * DE: I’d like to dig into this further in a separate call. I think the guarantees we want are different. Adding private fields after object creation is explicitly allowed. On the other hand, adding an extra operator overload does interfere because the operator creates non-local effects, because the operator can be used outside of the class. I don’t have a way to do this without the base class.
    * RB: Instead of "with operators", define special non-standard operators. I.e. @+. 
    * DE: Would that be a fixed set?
    * RB: It would be a fixed set of operators.
    * DE: Part of this should be to satisfy a BigDecimal polyfill, does this work.
    * RB: No, just a thought. I’ll look more into private fields concerns.
    * RG: Ron brings up something that I wanted to visit as well; whether operator overloading is even necessary if we instead pursue |> ([https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pipeline-operator](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=0&dest=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Ftc39%2Fproposal-pipeline-operator) )
    * (RG is unable to unmute, so we agree to take this up offline/next time)
    * DE: Should we do operator overloading in a world with pipeline?
* [Module attributes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-module-attributes)
    * Current state: String and maybe object literal
    * Further thoughts?
    * DE: Module attributes permit things like JSON modules to come to the web and be supported in a similar way across environments.
    * DE demonstrates module attributes explainer
    * DE: You could switch on MIME, but what if the server returns JS when you expect JSON, code will execute when unexpected. Any thoughts?
    * BK: There were some talks about whether it should be in band our out of band. Result was that it should be in band while layering out of band "stuff".
    * DE: Do Closure/TypeScript support JSON modules?
RB: We have ways of making it work via a flag, or .d.ts, but that is just CommonJS support for loading JSON.
    * BS: There are ways to use JSON, but not a "module" of JSON.
    * DE: How do people bundle JSON with Closure compiler?
    * BS: Protocol Buffers, JSON form of this that gets shipped back and forth.
BK: Many of the uses here are compiler build time things, configuration objects for example, and import as a simple object.
BS: The way you would do that for us, you would have a module file with javascript objects exported.
    * DE: Not a high priority feature request?
BS: Not really. You mean a file that contains JSON and nothing else, and want to import it. There is no real benefit to us.
    * DE: There are other module types than JSON that would all maybe use this infrastructure. Does that seem interesting or viable?
    * BS: I guess I don’t have a clear idea of what an HTML module would be.
BK: For you, nothing. In a browser, it would be a way to import a document that wasn’t opening a new window or anything like that, that you would use declaratively importing support for web components. Part of what Dan is saying, is a fundamental addition of attributes to modules for arbitrary reasons. Is there something compelling for tools to consider this feature?
    * DE: I think we can leave it at that.
    * DE: Can you post an issue to the Realms repo to talk about your concerns.
    * BS: Ok.
* Meta: Let's work together on the agendas and meeting organization!


-----
Examples:

1.
```
class Decimal extends EventEmitter {
    static operator (Decimal + Decimal) (a, b) {
    }
}
        * Dynamic operators via mixins:

function MixinAdd(baseClass, from, to, op) {

    return class extends baseClass {

        static operator (from + to) (a, b) {

            return op(a, b)

        }

    }

}
```
