
## 2020-10-15 20:00 Europe/Madrid

### Attendees

* Justin Fagnani (JF)
* Fred Kleuver (FK)
* Brian Kardell (BKL)
* Rob Eisenberg {RE)
* Daniel Ehrenberg (DE)
* Steve Hicks (SH)
* Jordan Harband (JHD)
*  

### Agenda and notes

* [September 2020 TC39](https://github.com/tc39/agendas/blob/master/2020/09.md) summary
    * [Decorators](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators) update: New proposal presented; people had interesting feedback but no "existential" concerns as in previous proposals. Plan is to prototype for six months at least. Please join the calls if you're interested.
    * [Import assertions](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-assertions): Reached Stage 3. Note that import assertions cannot be used to reinterpret the module, but only check things about it
    * [Records and Tuples](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple): "Box" may be possible for references to objects. Monthly calls planned; please let me know if you're interested
        * JF: I'm interested
    * [Built-in modules](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-built-in-modules/): didn't advance due to Chrome+Mozilla concerns about some things being globals and other things being modules
        *  Someone mentioned something like "browser element built-ins"? Any link to that? [Web Shared Libraries](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cBY3ZcHifXw) (BlinkOn 11 talk by flackr@)
        * JHS: What I heard at some point was that this included a lot of complexity, and with all this complexity people didn't find it palatable.
        * DE: I think there was always agreement that building polyfills was important, the scripts aspect added more complexity. Import maps was how to conditionally load polyfills, and the tradeoffs change without. There were a lot of aspects that went into it, some of them were considered out of scope for TC39 so they weren't brought there. The main benefit here was fallbacks and without that we don't have something there for that.
        * BF: Perhaps if the only way to access some things was async, this would simplify some things
        * DE: Imagine you had await Temporal.  Temporal is already big enough that it needs to be loaded async.
        * BF: One of the things we've seen though is that built-ins are not free to just keep adding on - I'm not sure it will scale forever
        * JF: I thought some objection came from Apples desire to have some kind of module registry
        * DE: There was a question about shared and split namespaces and mismatches.
        * SH: Increasing the benefit of possibly cutting out the builtins and move them into modules so that under some regime you could have to deal with it that way.
        * DE: Around ES6 times there was a big discussion about modularizing, but it seems like this still raises ecosystem concerns - like "don't change things because there is already an ecosystem around this"
        * JF: It seems pretty fraught and violates a "one JavaScript"
        * DE: We could have a way of _also_ adding module ways - this was getOriginals, a lot of work went into that but it increased load on it.
        * JF: One of the original motivations was for built in "pay as you go" elements that could ship with the browser
        * DE: OpenUI is approaching that differently https://open-ui.org/
        * BK: Since JF mentioned pay as you go - it's interesting to look at the history of the issue here about elements and pay as you go.  It seems that there was some kind of request for actual data on how that would improve for HTML and at TPAC last year it back back with that the research didn't actually seem to show a significant difference, at least for HTML - which is interesting
        * JF: Yes, also the rate of change of HTML is very slow so the value proposition was perhaps questionable - openui is approaching differently and it's interesting.
    * This framework call is officially a TC39 thing, but note that participating in this call doesn't attribute any special status to attendees (we're just chatting here, and you can join TC39 by joining Ecma or being an invited expert), and that we don't create proposals here (that's done on GitHub).
* [Import "evaluator" attributes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-assertions#follow-up-proposal-evaluator-attributes): A separate `import with` syntax to change send parameters influencing how modules are interpreted. Is anyone interested? If so, let's talk.
    * DE: We talked about import with - which you could include an object literal that allows for different interpretation of the module.  
    * JF: One of the things that I see bundlers do is asset references as a first class thing. I think this is very important for non-blocking loading of things like image references and things like that. I wonder if this could be used to help with that, you wouldn't be restricted to module types. I guess the question is does that fit
    * DE: Yes, in my mind.  Another use case I had in mind was prefetching.
    * JM: This would solve or help solve a whole bunch of stuff at once.  
    * JF: I think the more we can take bundler use cases and pave their cow paths and make it easier is good
    * JHD: There's tons of things that bundlers can do at build time, webpack already looks at comments - I can envision a bunch of use cases for bundlers, but I feel like it would be strange to include runtime syntax for that if the intention is to compile it out
    * JF: Not the intent - the intent is to make something that has a hope of running without a bundler
    * DE: I agree with justin that we could make a lot of this work on the web if we do it the right way, and I agree that that is what I would like to focus on
    * JM: I gathered a bunch of stuff that I think could inform: [Proposal: Standardize Import Prefixes](https://docs.google.com/document/u/3/d/1BObemtyKibEYKZPuu5YqHlam6gRSA42oqPMnuSGHcTs/edit)
    * JHD: You have something that someone could hand-write, what are some examples of runtime semantics you could imagine with this feature
    * JM: That's the kind of thing that that document is looking at.  
    * DE: We should have a name for "import transforms" that makes it clear and doesn't try to use existing terms like import assertions which are specifically defined now as not that.
    * JHD: If I have to read, I guess I can go read - but currently I don't understand or have an imagination of what runtime semantics you would need
    * DE: I think the next step would be to follow up in December or January since none of us have time before then.  Write something up, have a separate ad hoc meeting.
    * BF: Node has some interesting previous efforts in this space - there's very much an idea similar to this that we tried to do and I am very dissuaded from allowing any first class values to be manipulated.  I dont think that you should allow any object mutation
    * DE: No one is talking about hooks, it is transforming source text
    * BF: If it is just that, that is one thing - but our previous experiments did more and I think I have concerns if we start doing that.
    * JM: It has to be string to string
    * Everyone: Let's do this offline.
* Module blocks in JS [https://github.com/surma/proposal-js-module-blocks](https://github.com/surma/proposal-js-module-blocks): New proposal for an anonymous inline module that you can use to start a worker, run in a Realm, etc, for improved ergonomics with multithreaded code.
    * DE: The idea is to allow you to declare a module that is anon and be able to pass it into a realm import or worker - so the module gets evaluated into that context.  This is nice because you don't have to deal with 2 files. It is lexically contained inside, but it has its own scope and can't be closed over
    * JM: Best thing since sliced bread - everything I have tried to make has been screwed by not having this
    * JF: I was going to say the same thing
    * SH: Could this be used for bundling? how do you import it?
    * DE: this isn't about bundling, that is the next topic.
    * JHD: So the only way to work with this is to give it to something else - so it doesn't run in the main realm
    * DE: It runs wherever you import it.  It also integrates to create a bloburl
    * JHD: so if i `await import()` it three times in the same realm and it exports a global, that global would be `===`, but if i do it in another realm and compare, it won’t be?
DE: correct
    * JM: No static import declarations inside the module block?
    * DE: You can, but this module cannot be imported by another static import statement. It is a first class value you can use.
    * JM: It would dissuade from some patterns where it winds up being doubled
    * JF: in order for these to have imports and work in a module they have to have a base URL, this is a big problem with using modules in workers right now.  Right now you can do a self import from a module with meta.url, but you couldn't do that here.
    * DE: Why would you do that?
    * JF: It is an edge case, but I ha  ve seen it before
    * DE: We could use the blob URL..
    * JF: yeah but you can't really do something with it, because you need it to mean something
    * BF: There is something about them that allows them to be relative. I think resolving relative specifiers is what we want and blob urls already support that. Only the host can
    * DE: Surma says that this actually works specifically for that, I believe. 
    * LB: I am not sure how we get module evaluation and module graph and then have a different path, including… 
    * DE: How it would work mechanically?
    * LB: Yes, I need a better definition in my brain about how this integrates with workers
    * DE: it's true that the current explainer is value here. Another place it is vague is what is the identity of these.  There is the question about how this exists in the module graph which I guess is what leo was asking… I was thinking this would be a bloburl, the whole contents and the parse node (cache key)
    * JH: Why does the parse node matter if it can't close over. If I have identical contents in 6 places, is there a reason there would be 6 things?
    * DE: We could debate, but the way we have written here - they would be 6 things.  It would be observable 
    * BF: I think parse node as a cache key would have to be invalidated if you crossed an IPC boundary.  If parsenode is your cache key, you have to invalidate it - not send it across the boundary
    * DE: Structured clone of these is tricky and we didn't wind up with it in the doc. I thought blobURL would solve this though
    * BF: The lifetime of blobURLs is not well defined
    * CP: In general I like it, it addresses some of our challenges.  There is an intuition developers have that we will have to figure out because of the inability to close over - tools will help, but this will be tricky for some people.  Also placing breakpoints on the module block - what happens? We'll have to figure out - those are the things I see, but generally I like it
    * DE: If I could get people to file issues against the repo, that would be really helpful.
* Bundling: It'd be cool if ES modules could be shipped and executed natively, right? Tools could perform further optimizations, but might not be needed to get things to work, in the long term (?) A few possible approaches:
    * Some kind of inline modules in JS? ([extremely rough gist](https://gist.github.com/littledan/c54efa928b7e6ce7e69190f73673e2a0))
    * [Web Bundles](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1yEwfXIYuuMJbT6qst6cBFGaTaEANjtrSA_hL69xTk7M/edit): a bunch of grouped HTTP responses
    * Somehow making HTTP faster so it's not expensive to have tons of individual JS modules??
    * Realizing that, actually, there's no problem to solve, and tools are fine
