How this document works:

* The most recent/upcoming agenda/notes is at the top
* Notes are taken inline with the agenda (help appreciated!)
* Sign your name under "Attendees" when you join
* Notes are published at https://github.com/littledan/js-outreach-groups/blob/master/tools
* Attendees are encouraged to add agenda items
* Contact [littledan@igalia.com](mailto:littledan@igalia.com) for an event invite

-------

April 30, 2019. 11 AM America/Los_Angeles

Attendees:

* Bradley Farias
* Sven Sauleau
* Shane Carr
* Nicolo Ribaudo
* Brian Kardell
* Nicolo Ribaudo
* Richard Gibson
* Rob Palmer

Agenda and notes:

* Working mode and purpose of this group
    * Working mode
        * Proposal from from https://github.com/littledan/js-outreach-groups
            * Input on direction/priorities
            * Feedback on Stage 2 or earlier proposals
            * Distribute information about TC39, Stage 3+ proposals, etc
            * Expose opportunities to get involved (in GitHub, docs, etc)
            * Not a consensus-seeking group, just a data source
        * Any modifications?
    * Possible things we could focus on:
        * Review TC39 proposals from a tooling perspective
        * Review other web platform proposals (e.g., other module types)
        * Share implementation techniques, known spec violations
        * Figure out how tooling can/should take part in moving JS and the web forward
        * SC: Tooling can mean a lot of things: JS build systems, streamlining the process for changes to the spec (our tooling). Who is the audience for the tooling?
        * DE: I was thinking to focus on linters, transpilers, type checkers and bundlers
        * BF: Which things though - why particularly? TypeScript? PureScript? Does it have to be a particular 'type' of tool? We're trying to exclude C compilers but -- things that are close to JavaScript? How close? Why?
        * DE: I don't want to be exclusionary - I think when we have a new JS feature, what is the impact of that on tooling.  For example, when we add new syntax, how does that affect superset languages like TS. If people want to come and contribute, I don't want to exclude them.  What's your concern?
        * BF: The concerns we're bringing up about proposals are how supersets would be affected if they use them.  Rather than how the proposal affects the language as a whole.  So there's a focus on blockers rather than improvements.
        * DE: If we are focused on blockers we can reconsider but I think we are getting ahead of ourselves. I want to hear the input. Does that make sense?  Rather than premptively try to say, we can decide as they come up?
        * BF: Yes and no.  That's why I want to delay until I see further.
        * DE: Topic proposal: Top-level await and decorators
<Dan presents some top-level await proposal stuff>
It's at stage 2, Myles Borrins is the champion of this, we'd like to propose it for stage 3 at the next meeting (June).  Lots of discussions on issues, partially related to tooling…<Dan shows issues 51, 47 for example>
            * Discussion around what this means for babel which doesn't have the whole dependency graph context and how this might work via a 'protocol'.  Concerns around some regenerator runtime ballooning of sizes.  Concerns expressed around a potential implication that this means that every module in the graph has to understand and participate in the same protocol or it doesn't work. 
DE: Should we put together some kind of agreement on how tooling should informally work as recommendations for coordination.  If transpilers and bundlers need to cooperate it seems like maybe we need a way to facilitate that?
BE: As long as we don't indicate that it is a standard or something
            * DE: Ok, so how should we go about working on this together? Do we leave it to bundlers or do we need cooperation? 
            * GB: Is it necessary that a lot of the use cases be similar in all environments or is it enough to kind of solve it for certain spaces where top level await use cases seem to be most prevalent/necessary?

<Discussion around whether TypeScript has and uses information from the whole module graph vs per-file processing>

BE: It sounds like we are categorizing tools, maybe that is how we should approach it "if you only have …" Maybe we can make a recommendation of "oh you need to do this only at runtime without the whole source graph, here is the recommendation" vs "you have the whole source graph".  Categorizing these tools might allow us to talk about the problem a bit better.

* GB: If I was using babel with rollup, I would want rollup to handle the top-level await as it has the data necessary to do that more efficiently.
* NR: We already don't transpile es modules
* RP: If you don't know the entire graph - if you have one labelled as external, that unknown part of the graph may contain an async await. Implies that you can't collapse everything into a single graph. In practice this means you can't use rollup because that is the whole point of rollup.  So I think that in practice bundlers are going to ignore this part of the spec and I want to make sure people go into this with eyes open.
* <discussion explaining this bit of the spec'ing>
* GB: I agree that is a huge footgun.  It seems like a spec concern that is dictating this rather than a user or language thing that is surprising (this may be minuted poorly)
* 
    * ~~Anyone who we should invite who's missing?~~
* Proposal reviews
    * [Top-level await](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await). [FAQ](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await#faq) Current semantics sketch:
        * "Variant B": "Sibling modules" (`import "a"; import "b"`) await in parallel, not series
        * No microtask checkpoint as part of this proposal, but it may be proposed separately. [#47](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await/issues/47)
        * Always-synchronous subgraphs run synchronously, so ordering is preserved [#61](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await/pull/61)
        * [Import await](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-top-level-await/pull/60) was considered but isn't being pursued at TC39 due to strong reservations (contradictory intuitions about whether it should or shouldn't be implicit)
        * DE: (introduces proposal)
        * DE: Concern regarding CommonJS compatibility
        * NR: I like the PR about import await; this would be easier to implement in tooling.  I think this is one case where even if it is hard for us to support it, we shouldn't be considered a problem, because it would be a loss.
        * SS: We need a way to implement it in Babel, since people will want to use it?
        * DE: Do you see any blockers to that?
        * SS: So basically, Babel is operating per file.  So if you include a.js, you don't know whether a.js has top-level await or not.
        * DE: You can check at runtime if you got a Promise from the module you're importing.
        * SS: I'm a bit concerned about performance. If you create a runtime for each import.
        * BF: Wouldn't they need to check the full subgraph if a Promise propagates?
        * DE: The idea is that you have to return a Promise at runtime.
        * DE: If any of your imports return a Promise, then your module should also return a Promise.
        * BF: That's different than how require() has worked.
        * DE: require() doesn't have top-level await. We're making new conventions.
        * RP: Maybe we could use a tagged promise?
        * BF: We are trying to add semantics onto something that isn't backwards compatible.  Maybe achieving backwards compatibility between language variants, etc., isn't a good idea moving forward.  Bundlers that control the full stack, like Webpack, this is a different problem.
        * GB: On Babel, this is specifically for outputting CommonJS.  If you're making ECMAScript modules, then these same issues don't apply?  Okay, so yeah, even if you're outputting ES modules, you need runtime support.  So it's a tooling issue.
        * NR: This could be even more difficult to implement in ES modules than in CJS
        * GB: So you're basically shifting your entire Babel graph.  Is it worth defining a protocol that you can use to determine whether an import returns a Promise or not?
        * DE: There's some discussion on the issue tracker about these conventions.
        * NR: Someone proposed making static imports await .then, like dynamic imports do.
        * DE: I'm not a fan of that proposal.
        * RP: This seems quite risky, because it requires every consumer of the module to obey that protocol.  If you come up with a protocol, everyone who imports that needs to understand that protocol.  That goes against the current protocol where it's much more isolated.
        * SS: ___ is doing something similar with ESM, etc.  Once you include a package, you have this issue.  If the vendor …
        * GB: Let me share some of my experiences.  In Rollup, we've implemented an experimental version of top-level await that will build the whole graph together.  From tooling, Rollup builds the graph in graph order.  Under that vibe, what's implemented is variant A (blocking sibling execution).  Since we're including those modules in the order they came in the Rollup build.  I'm trying to update it to variant B.  The stuff with the sync subgraphs works out great that we have spec semantics.  In general, variant A is a subset of variant B, so it shouldn't be a breaking change.  The other thing is, in the SystemJS project, that has top-level support.
        * DE: Are there any changes that we should consider to the top-level await proposal given bundlers?  Or should we work together with adopting some conventions for tooling output to make things work better together?
        * BF: I think we could document recommended practices, but I'd be weary of making standardized polyfills.
        * DE: Maybe we can share a document on GitHub to help people coordinate.
        * BF: I'm weary of putting it in the proposal repo itself because people might think that this is part of the standard.
        * DE: Could we give more context that this is only a discussion?
        * BF: That's fine.
        * RP: SGTM
        * DE: What should the convention be?  How should we move forward?
        * SS: You mean the module protocol?
        * DE: We discussed the difficulty of transpiling this to CJS.  Is this something that we leave to bundlers, or something that we expect to be done on a file-by-file basis?
        * SS: This seems to me like an isolated case.  I don't know how TS handles this.  Maybe bundlers can coordinate among ourselves to come up with a solution.
        * GB: A lot of the use cases around top-level await seem to be scenarios for Node or things where you want to use conditional dynamic import.  Is it necessary that these use cases are brought back to older environments?  Or do we just tell users that these are modern features that require a modern environment?  Or does that go against Babel's goal as a project?
        * GB: As far as I'm aware, TS doesn't use cross-module data.  But they could maybe move in that direction.
        * RP: 99% of the time, transpilation is independent on the file basis.  There's one tiny edge case.  But ultimately it sounds like they don't want to be a bundler.
        * SS: So it sounds like they're similar to Babel.
        * BF: Within TC39, there's people who want features to be runtime inspectable.  So we could make it if you only have access to things at runtime, if you have bundlers that create things that are a single sourcetext, then we have things that are sourcetext to sourcetext without bundling.  So we could say that you can only do this at runtime.  It was called something like "__await" in the issues.  I think categorizing these tools would let us talk about the problem a bit better.
        * GB: To give an example, if running Babel into Wordlab, if doing that as a build, I don't want to have to put in a bunch of wrappers, since that adds to my download size.  Having that mode as an option seems to make sense.  Having fine-grained protocol methods.
        * NR: We already don't transpile ES modules.
        * DE: If you're making a module that has external dependencies, what do you do?
        * RP: The situation is that if you don't know the entire graph, if you have an external import, then you don't know if that part of the graph has top-level await.  So you can't collapse everything into a single subgraph and you have to keep everything in separate modules.  In practice, this means you can't use Rollup, since the point of Rollup is to condense everything into a single module.  So in practice, bundlers will ignore this part of the spec.  So I want to make sure we're going into this with our eyes open.
        * GB: Let's say you have modules A, B, and C.  A imports B, and both are synchronous modules, and B imports C, your external module, which may have top-level await.  The import of B into A is effectively a synchronous subgraph which may or may not depend on the async C external dependency.
        * RP: That's not possible to do in the future world by spec.
        * GB: Wouldn't A import B still happen synchronously?
        * RP: No.
        * DE: Once you get to a top-level await, anything that loads higher in the graph load with Promise.all.  I think both GB and RP have said, why aren't those synchronous reactions?  The idea is that we already have a way of grouping reactions in the spec, which is promises.  So making a separate system is not a good idea.
        * GB: I agree with RP, this is a big footgun.  I think sync graphs remain sync.  Any sync internal chain should be sync.
        * SS: does it mean the per-file transpilers would need to emit runtime code defensively to support TLA anywhere in the graph?
        * SC: Would it make things simpler to make all imports async, with promises optionally resolving synchronously?
        * DE: We thought about that with the microtask queue flush, but there were some undesirable outcomes.
        * GB: So this seems like it is a spec constraint of having a graph iteration algorithm running in a sync mode, that then switched into an async mode, as opposed to a language or user constraint. Surely there is a way to refactor simply to retain any synchronous chains?


