Aug 26, 2019

Attendees:

* Ron Buckton
* Guy Bedford
* Brian Kardell
* Rob 

Agenda and notes:

* Update on  [Optional Chaining](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-optional-chaining/) and [Nullish Coalescing](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-nullish-coalescing/) from Daniel?
    * RB: Daniel is on vacation so I don't think he can comment… I can say that I've been working on the TypeScript implementation
    * GB: I'm looking at the issues on the GH, there are some open issues but I don't know if there are any that anyone cares to discuss?
* [Reduce the amount of implementation-defined behavior in ](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/1585)[Array.prototype.sort](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/1585) ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/150ZYUl_eyFcc4nXGKA_WB88WvOTArG5QveVXl9Oe8dY/edit))
    * BK: Primarily to do with behaviour of array with holes being different between implementations. Proposal to define the steps but not the sorting algorithm - to define the steps to deal with the differences between those to get consistent sort behaviour across the engines.
* Object.map (stage 0, for stage 1)
    * GB: There isn't a proposal repo here, but from what I can glean it is a static function on Object which takes a function.  The function takes as an argument an array containing the key and the value entry and returns a new one
   `Object.map(obj, ([key, value]) => [newKey, newValue]);`

Rob: This is to avoid iterating intermediate steps of entries?  Is this supported already by lodash?

GB: unsure

RB: Lodash has operations for something like this - it's kind of a shorthand for stuff you can already do, I guess.  I don't have an opinion on it really, it's a relatively simple thing.

Rob: I might have stronger opinions if we had some stats on usage of other solutions to this problem.

RB: We could maybe search typescript via [https://bigtsquery.firebaseapp.com/query](https://bigtsquery.firebaseapp.com/query) (it currently only searches typescript code)

BK: Hard to tell without more what my own thoughts are - we kind of just have one line and not a lot of knowledge about existing use

GB: I don't have strong opinions, I'm sure sure how we prioritize these kinds of APIs

* [Const Value Types](https://github.com/rricard/proposal-const-value-types) (stage 0, for stage 1)
    * Rob: basically immutable objects and arrays - the most important take away is it is a proposal for a new primitive type.  This means that you can deeply compare them by value with === and get cheap comparison.  Questions?
    * GB: I really like the proposal. I've used immutable before, it's quite good.  How will you define other operators?
    * Rob: I believe that we would only support ===, what else would you support
    * GB: i don't know, I was just wondering - maybe > or < somehow? Might be esoteric?
    * RB: If you wanted to be able to compare them, how do you define how the relationship works if it is regardless of order? It seems you would need to ask some more questions than what are currently answered in the spec.  I think they all had null object prototypes, is there a way to add methods or prototypical members?
    * Rob: There is no way.  The original proposal did, it had const classes, but we dropped that as it seemed unnecessary scope.  We backed off that for now in order to keep it as minimal as possible because it is quite a substantial proposal already.
    * GB: To come back to equality and ordering issue - it seems like preserving ordering would add a constraint which might have implications.  If you were to say for example, that the objects had lexicographical ordering that you maintained for iteration - this could be used. Has this been discussed 
    * Rob: Yes, it's perhaps one way to have order agnosticism.
    * RB: I'm not sure I agree with lexicographical ordering as it is inconsistent with the spec …. Has toString been defined?  I would think not as they have a null prototype.
    * Rob: We got a lot of feedback after a tweet from Brendan Eich, there have been some changes.
    * BK: Can you serialize and deserialize these somehow easily?
    * Rob: This was a recent question, I don't know that we have an answer.  The ability to potentially do this was a strong enough motivation to avoid the use of symbols here.
    * GB: Would this be available via structured clone maybe?  It says "all primitive types", if this is a new primitive type it might be a natural fit - have any discussions been had?
    * Rob: No, but you are very welcome to follow up on that - it seems useful.
    * GB: Does this create some challenges for TypeScript? Does something like ordering matter to that?
    * RB: I don't think so, other than that we couldn't catch the ordering this way currently.
    * Rob: So you are saying if order _did_ matter, there might be a concern for TypeScript?
    * RB: We don't have a way to do that today.  There is room for us to investigate this without it causing problems in the long term, we just don't today.
    * Rob: That would actually be very valuable to see if we can get a type of feedback and inform things based on some exploration.

* RegExp Match array offsets [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-regexp-match-indices](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-regexp-match-indices) stage 3 quick update
    * 262 tests PR right now
    * Behind a flag in v8
    * Polyfill (follows jordan's es polyfill design)
    * We made a minor change to the spec based on v8 implementer feedback so that it can be turned into a lazy value
    * We're waiting on a second implementation
