February 25, 2020

Attendees:

* Bradford C. Smith (BCS)
* Brian Kardell (BKL)
* Dan Ehrenberg (DE)
* Rick Button (RBU)
* Sven Sauleau (SSA)
* Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
* Rob Palmer (RPR)
* Guy Bedford (GDB)
* Daniel Rosenwasser (DR)
* Ron Buckton (RB)
* Richard Gibson (RGN)

Agenda and notes:

* February 2020 TC39 meeting review ([agenda](https://github.com/tc39/agendas/blob/master/2020/02.md)):
* [WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/) Stage 3 status update ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1a4hrdlEcpyKmBj6VtAVYDkokeW_HLFXcg11xIxhwlWM/edit#slide=id.p))
    * WeakRefs moving towards shipping soon; last API details being worked out
    * DE: In progress in all engines, some spec text changes - a bunch of things tied down about delays and guarantees of semantics.  (showing in slides). It's all sort of moving ahead… Wondering if this is interesting to tools/tooling - any thoughts?
* Continuing discussion about [SES](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-ses)/[Realms](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-realms)
    * Realms and SES were presented at Feb 2020 plenary, still based on eval'ing strings, and  all information seems to be in repos
    * DE: people were excited about this in the frameworks meeting, in this meeting there was concern for lack of support without evaling a string.  I brought this back as feedback - there was an idea of having a separate evaluator.  What do you think - is it ok for these to move forward with this evaluator thing coming later?
    * RB: What is the alternative being considered?
    * DE: If a realm has this ability to do IO and things like that, it's not this low privilege thing.  It's hard to think about. I was pretty convinced last time we talked about this that evaluating a thing that isn't just passing a string to eval is something that would be really necessary.
    * RB: BCS mentioned a concern during the last meeting.
    * BCS: That was me.. Closure compiler would need this.  Maybe we don't care that much because the Realms and SES use cases are ones we don't care about as much. At the moment I'm not seeing how the users I am concerned about most would use it.
    * DR: I am curious if there is a way to have a path to a file that could have been statically analyzed - not just a string that you'd eval - if that would meet your use case
    * BCS: It could, but modules are really problematic atm, since they get compiled away, but this *might* work.
    * DR: #feelsbad. Realms are supposed to contain code that you want to keep isolated. Some sort of API to import some file would be helpful.
    * DE: Maybe I could walk through the API...
    * DR: If there’s something wrong with actually eval’ing the code, is eval still bad in the case of realms, or is it okay now?
    * DE: I think it is still bad for a few reasons: Realms doesn't provide a full way to isolate things - you need to do a lot more stuff on top of it. Some people take an even more conservative stance - SES is steps on top of that. But there are also envs where you don't want to process JavaScript code, trying to prevent code injection, for example. There is this way to get the global objects and builtins, and have integrity.  This just creates like a new JavaScript object that you could evaluate things against.  
    * RB: the reason there is a difference between global and this value is because …
    * DE: I don't think we actually have a completely solid story around this and we might have to come back and flesh that out a little
    * RB: I thought the presentation had something in here about subclassing
    * DE: I might be missing something… 
    * DR: I'd have to look at the spec text and examples
    * DE: intrinsics are a new value that are created each time without allowing them to be patched or modified…. (missed???)
    * RB: I'm not sure about module maps
    * DE: It's not as expressive as a lot of real JavaScript environments. They said they wanted to start with something and could add more later
    * DR: Is importSync a thing you think the committee will be open to
    * DE: *I *don't think so
    * DR: TypeScript might need to do some work to understand that those Compartment methods are actually importing file.
    * DE: presumably, an imperative fork would be much worse.
    * DR: Sounds like this needs more discussion within the committee.
    * DE: SES is stage 1 and not listed for advancement, but realms is stage 2 and lined up for stage 3. The feedback is that it lacks functionality, and I’ve been talking to the proposal champions. WDYT.
    * RB: More interested in the possibility of creating security transparent imports, but that’s just a tangent. The main issue with eval is that you have possibly untrusted inputs. As realms are also banned by CSP, then it’s likely okay.
    * DE: That seems unfortunate
    * RB: Until we can kind of somehow marshal and unmarshal trusted strings for this it just seems like it has limited utility for a lot of cases.  Realm is good as it is proposed, but there is potentially a lot of room for improvement. There have been a number of other proposals that could provide a way to marshal syntax to another realm to be evaluated, such as Binary AST or Domenic Denicola’s (now withdrawn) blöcks proposal.
    * DE: Does anyone else have any thoughts?
    * RPR: use-case would be for always loading content from files, not dynamic strings, useful for things like AOT parsing.
    * RB: browsers can extend this to ???
    * RB: have a problem with how module-map handles certain functionality.
    * DE: might help creating more globals, the realm represents a global object.
    * GDB: no sub-proxies?
    * DE: the compartments concept.
    * DE: a module-??? is part of the roadmap.
    * DE
    * BCS: I guess since I had brought up this thing about objecting to the use of executing strings - looking at it more it seems like this is kind of the point of why this feature is being developed, so I am withdrawing my objection because in retrospect/with more context it doesn't make sense.
    * DE: there’s no membrane. You need to build other things around this to make this secure.
    * GDB: ???
    * DE: the goal is to share a heap.
    * RB: Realms is more like an iframe, you're all still running in the same thread/message loop, but you're isolated
    * GDB: isn’t it always going to be leaky?
    * RB: realms is a low-level primitive that such systems would be built on top of.
    * DE: what does that mean for the eval interface?
    * BCS: i’m looking at this from a historical pov. This bit is one of the building blocks for what the proposal champions really want, which would provide for secure evaluation of strings.
* Continuing discussion about operator overloading and subclassing
    * Dan doesn't see how subclasses could overload operators without compromising integrity goals, though agrees it would be nice to support. Does anyone have ideas?
    * RB: I have an open issue with TypeScript to look at these integrity goals to see if I can align the goals - I'm not entirely thrilled with the design but I also agree that operator overloading is needed. I think I just need some time - I'd like to understand better how you see subclassing being problematic
    * DE: sure, I can walk you through that, and I’d be excited to see a proposal for the same. *opens up the proposal*
        * Within operating overloading, the idea is that operators cannot be monkey-patched.
        * One aspect of this is that we don’t use methods, but operator dicts.
        * *demonstrates working of the proposal*
        * We could make changes, but we would have to work things out because it seems the prototype chain would be mutable… Maybe we can create a snapshot but it would create a mismatch
    * RB: My thinking was that the … are you saying if I wanted to subclass and override, I would have two operator ids ?
    * DE: I am thinking, how would it get its operator id?
    * RB: This feels like a concern more about how the design implementation works, perhaps I can think a little more in depth. My initial thinking was that when class definition evaluation happens you could copy the operator set into the new class.  I guess the question is where do we want to draw the line at where you want this to be static.  
    * DE: I could totally see a design where we get the operator set from the new target and that they could copy their parents and that could work.  We have avoided this in the past - deliberately avoided. 
    * RB: It could be based on order 
    * DE: ..?? … the whole chain can be dynamic
    * RB: I can look into this, it would be interesting to look at how this works in other languages. We won't necessarily be able to match those, but it seems important that users have the right expectations
    * DE: I think we have to meet several expectations.  We get the union of everybody's constraints.
    * RB: I can look at this more in depth, it was a good conversation.
* Decorators: thoughts on next steps?
    * V8 has publicly posted feedback about concerns with static decorators; Ron raised other concerns as well. What should we do?
* (If time allows) [asynchronous initialization](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-async-init) opinions?
    * GDB: I think it is interesting because I can see how people might think it would be like 'of course you should have this' but I think it has some bad design patterns - constructors that do a lot of work… that you have things in an incomplete state for a long time. I think it's kind of a good thing that you can't do async logic.  It does make it behave in a more normal way, so I can see why people think you should be able to.  I've had a similar discussion on the issues I've opened - so I thought it would be an interesting topic to see if anyone *else *had those same thoughts
    * RB: Not a *huge* fan of the idea, but I have had similar needs. Like, sqllite - you can construct it synchronously but all of these things you actually need are not ready yet - so you create the database and then have some other static async thing you have to await… people can still call the constructor.  I don't know, I dont think there is a good answer
    * GDB: I'm glad that someone from TypeScript is talking about this because I thought TypeScript specifically prevented this
    * RB: we have the advantage of static typing, JavaScript doesn't have static guarantees…. At the end of the day I kind of agree with your basic sentiment that you are better off making your constructors minimal but --- I can see both arguments. I dont know if the complexity warrants the work.  Does it return a promise or does it await automatically
    * ??: If they can be async, can they be generators *?
    * DE: Should we have async getters?
    * RB: I think we should not. The problem is that you also should have async setters then.  It shouldn't do too much.  
