May 26, 2020

Attendees:

* John Lenz (Google, Closure Compiler)
* Bradley Farias (GoDaddy)(BFS)
* Brandon Mills (ESLint)(BMS)
* Rick Button (Bloomberg)(RBN)
* Brian Kardell (Igalia)(BKL)
* Ron Buckton (RB)
* Daniel Ehrenberg (Igalia)(DE)
* Bradford Smith (Google) (BSH)
* Richard Gibson (OpenJS Foundation) (RGN)
* Lalitha Iyer (Netflix)

Agenda and notes:

* Some things that will likely be on the agenda for the June 2020 TC39 meeting:
    * [Temporal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-temporal), stage 2 update: hoping for Stage 3 in a few months, reviews from trying out the polyfill and/or reading the docs are very welcome
        * [DE presents] 
        * BFS: think the big thing with temporal is that linting will have to do some stuff with it… It is kind of type-heavy in my opinion. It's made in such a way that linting can get more complicated for linters.
        * BMS Is that the job of a type system/compiler or a linter?
        * BFS: Unclear I guess
        * DE: It differs from moment's version that just has one big type.  You have different types to avoid some classes of error where things just don't make sense with certain data points
        * DR: You could write a lint rule to protect against some of this stuff

    * [Records and Tuples](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple), stage 1 update: Considering Stage 2 in July, presenting related proposals on [deep path updates](https://github.com/rickbutton/proposal-deep-path-properties-for-record), and some system for [references to objects](https://github.com/rricard/proposal-boxing-objects/)
        * [DE Presents] - notes they're not so transpilable.  Illustrates deep path properties as potentially useful for tooling
        * RB: I had a couple of concerns that I will probably open on the issue tracker.  I had a proposal that I brought in several years ago that I will probably bring back at some point, it might have conflicts with this proposal that causes me some concerns.
        * DE: would be great to file that as an issue
        * RB: It is a feature that has been in C# for about a decade now, it's based on existing prior art so I will bring it up again - I just haven't had the bandwidth to give it attention with other proposals happening.
        * DE: Agree we should not do both - they are competing for the same space.  Overall I was wondering if deep path properties should be part of records and tuples, but the recommendation is to have it be separate
        * RB: If it is going to be separate, maybe we can see if there is a way to marry the two and have one proposal or if they will be at odds for the syntax and we will just have to pick one or the other.
        * DE: Overall I think we could choose a different syntax for deep path.  Do you think this is an existential risk for records and tuples?
        * RB: No I think we will just have to discuss them together.
        * RBN: we should follow up with an issue on this repo (records & tuples)

    * [Intl.DurationFormat](http://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-duration-format) for Stage 2: new formatter for durations of dates and times
    * [Operator overloading](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-operator-overloading): Should we keep going in this direction? How should this relate to Decimal?
        * DE: Do we want to move forward with operator overloading at all in JS?
        * RB: I'd like it for value types, but not for general Object types. Opposed to how it works in C++. Some of my coworkers are more strongly against operator overloading.
        * RGN: Operator overloading makes me uncomfortable. Would like a more convenient way to do functions as infix, e.g. `v1 @Vector.crossProduct v2`
        * RB: investigating Op overloading in another proposal I'm working on. Restricts it to specific use cases.
        * DE: Ron could you follow up with me later regarding your concerns?
        * RB: I would be interested in that, yes.
        * DE: value-type classes as a whole are interesting. Need a way to get to the method for the value type.
        * RB: information is tracked with the value in my proposal
        * DE: that would break membranes potentially
        * JL: there isn't a formal acceptance of SES, though we often consider it when deciding things.
        * BFS: there is a SES proposal that's rather outdated, it has spun off into multiple proposals: realms, compartments, etc. Various runtimes are adopting parts of SES. Node has a CLI flag for frozen intrinsics, etc.; however, it is very hard to use an OCAP model in JS.
        * DE: In TC39 we are split - there is one group on each side, which puts us in a situation where it could go either way and so we have to try to consider it
        * BFS: as long as people don't try to propose SES features for their security properties we have not had problems moving them forward. The problem is if we try to move forward with something that breaks a perceived security feature of SES we get blocked.
        * BM: From the linter perspective, we do a couple of things where we try to evaluate expressions on the fly, we might either have to disable certain checks or just live with the outcome. The with operators syntax would at least let us know there is operator overloading vs having no idea at all.
        * DE: Do you think there is anything more fine grained you can do given that you have the type?
        * BM: We do have some local type information. We could see that LHS and RHS agree, and we can do something - but there are other cases where we just can't know.
        * RB: It seems like not knowing types is already a common case - how is this different - or what do you do?
        * [straw poll on general support for operator overloading] 
            * JL, generally against
            * RB: we are split internally, still forming opinion on thoughts and how we could make something work
            * RB: would be interested in defining a standard way for native extensions to add new value types without actually allowing addition of new value types via JS code
            * DR: At least we'd know that overloading is in use in a file.  It doesn't give us a lot of information.  I'm just trying to understand it a little bit more
            * DE: We could potentially say what operators are overloaded, it just gets more complicated - it's a tradeoff
            * JL: We have no way to know whether you are missing or have extra imports -there's no kind of help along this way.
            * RBN: I think TypeScript can help here
            * DE: In my proposal there is no runtime ambiguity
            * BM: We could auto-import the operator or suggest that you do that if you had information on both sides. If you're able to look up where something was defined and assigned, it might be possible.  I suspect that people would tend to import * for convenience.
            * RBN: Now that you mention it I assumed that this was importing the star operator, not all… That is ambiguous
            * DE: Agree, maybe that could say 'all' or something instead - it is ambiguous. The reason this operators from was included in the design was so that you wouldn't unexpectedly be using an overloaded operator
            * RB: The point of the operator statement is so that you can say "I know there is more going on here than meets the eye"
            * DE: You can argue that this is not a good constraint, but the idea of the constraint is that you …?
            * BSH: Does anyone want to make a strong case why it does belong in the language?
            * BFS: Only that we see it increasingly in the ecosystem
            * RB: would like to have Temporal objects allow e.g. Date + duration
            * DE: wouldn't that be more cryptic - hard to find documentation of what happens?
            * RB: I'm coming from C# where that capability has been around for a long time
    * [Module attributes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-module-attributes) for Stage 2: Adds JSON modules, imported with `with type: "json"`.
        * [DE presents - explains how browsers determine how to interpret and the problems with just importing json, for example]
        * JL: I am unclear the value here if we have top level await
        * DE: One thing is that it will happen in a separate path. Another is that it lays the foundation for things like css modules and html modules.
        * BSH: It seems like moving something that we can already do into the lagungage and I'm not sure I see the benefits
        * DR: From the TypeScript side, we hear people want to know the shape of the imported thing - they want some known schema available to the tool. The funny thing about that is if you want that thing, you don't have a dynamic resource, you have it locally so you can do it today, really.  I'm not sure how I feel about the use case - I kind of prefer to tell people to use fetch even. I wish we didn't have to have this - it seems like it is not as pretty as it was before - I get why it is necessary and what it prevents
        * BSH: It sounds like solving the problem at the wrong level?
        * DE: There's foundation here for things in like Web Components that people are excited about for subresources - you have to say on the client what you want to do here
        * BFS: A slightly different perspective - there is a new feature in node where if you dont configure it exactly right, you can't import and can't require a package.json - that broke a very lot of tools. We told them "you can use the filesystem" and people told us "we don't want to".  They see fetch and stuff as a second class thing - they became used to this with existing systems.  People are mutating things that they import and expecting it to be mutated at a different call site… this is just sort of how the js ecosystem is, so saying that it is surprising to the ecosystem is actually just not true
        * RB: the one thing I buy is that this helps us align with node
        * BFS: But that's not true - this is really more about things like bundling for the web.
        * DE: I thought this would be helpful for things like webpack?
        * BFS: We see it for some translation files at the top level, rarely.  
        * DE: But importing CSS and stuff is desirable common
        * BFS: Very common.  CSS modules though don't seem to work like anything we see.
        * RB: Right now it seems the only use case we see for this with clause is for specifying the type - I know decorators has been mired in lots of conflicts and challenges, but I wonder if we got it to move forward if we could use a meta decorator here that is like @import or @type or something
        * DE: There were lots of proposals here, that would add new syntax too… why would that be good?
RB: Type annotation/decoration has been a discussion.. It seems useful. There are other kinds of data I'd like to put here beyond just type.  I can do things like help specify security boundaries, I'd love to be able to see that someday with JavaScript and it seems like decorators on an import declaration would be a good way
        * DE: They would have to be static decorator or this wouldn't work.  For some use cases it is nice for these to be runtime values
        * RB: Sometimes, but I think even then those are rarely actually runtime variables you want to refer to.

    * [#name in obj](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-fields-in-in) for Stage 2: Brand checking based on private names
    * [Function implementation hiding](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-function-implementation-hiding) for stage 3, requesting pragma wording feedback
    * [Arbitrary Module Namespace Names](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1kYG69h_-x4qULJ9vw24agdt6hhJbpeOFFLC-6t55jVM/edit#slide=id.p), allowing JS to expose non identifier-name export names.
* Summary/update from the biweekly Decorator calls
    * We're surveying decorator use cases. Please add yours here, whether novel or analogous to others' use of decorators [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1QP0hfXkkkAXTktGrI7qrt-RUqKp2KtsVKuPo4yuoZZI/edit#gid=0](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1QP0hfXkkkAXTktGrI7qrt-RUqKp2KtsVKuPo4yuoZZI/edit#gid=0) 
    * We're wondering, for tools, whether cross-module implementation/optimization of decorators is possible, either as a mandatory or optional step. We want to be practical and minimize implementation complexity, while addressing startup time concerns that browsers have raised.
