June 25, 2019, 20:00 Europe/Madrid

Attendees:

* Brian Kardell
* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Sunil Pai
* Daniel Rosenwasser
* Stefan Penner
* Rajat Kumar
* Guy Bedford
* Lalitha Iyer

Agenda and notes:

* TC39 status update: Lots happened in the June meeting:
    * import() and BigInt: Stage 4
    * WeakRefs: Stage 3
        * SP: There was a long running policy to not expose GC heuristics, has that policy changed? 
        * DE: The answer is that it should change as little as possible about that policy.  There is a lot in the spec about the unreliability of garbage collection.  If there was something you wanted to try to observe, this is the place.
    * Top-level await: Stage 3
    * Optional chaining/nullish coalescing: Stage 2, ongoing controversy about ?.(
        * DR: Optional call is the most conflicting behavior. It's going to be a matter of getting TC39 to find general consensus that it's a useful feature, and that it's not a harmful addition to the language. The more I speak with people, the more they seem open to it. The thing that sold me on it was to use ?.( in action handlers, e.g., if you have an onClick handler that's optional, you can do onClick?.()--if the person provided onClick, then you call it, otherwise you do nothing. This is useful if you compose handlers. E.g., log on error, etc. Angular mentioned element lifecycle hooks (I couldn't find it in source code, it would be helpful if we could find it). We need examples where the receiver is captured.
        * SP: Receiver?
        * DR: foo.bar?.(1,2, 3) you could do the same with .call but you have to rebind the this. 
        * SP: It's not clear maybe that you would have to rebind the this, that might be confusing. The pitfall I saw from Ruby is that it is nice to be able to write this, but as codebases change, it seems to bitrot earlier because it becomes a silent failure.  It is somewhat like Rusts .unwrap?
        * DR: I'm biased--I'd say, throw a type system at it. The feature isn't error suppression, but rather fixing missing values. If you want to protect against bitrot, you need a tool to help. 
        * SP: When I was writing TS the other day, I was wishing I had this. Anyway, I think ?.( is a good idea, since I don't want people to have to use ?.call( and remember this. Ruby gets around thisby the default being the other way around.
    * Pipeline: Significant research ongoing
        * DE: <summarizes the research efforts led by yulia>.  We all in TC39 are really excited about this for language design
        * SP: is there a place to read about the research
        * DE: there was a blog post introducing it, I don't know if there has been a writeup on the intermediate status, but the end plan is to create/write an academic paper.
    * Standard library/built-in modules: Standing controversy about split vs unified namespaces
        * DE: <summarizes discussion/controversy about layering and who can set/govern>
        * SP: I would like to talk about standard library functions that require a receiver.
        * DE: it keeps being suggested that there were a way to do this with the standard library.
        * SP: Like Promise.resolve - if we exposed resolve from a module or is it bound from the global Promise constructor
        * DE: This gets into explaining existing things that way too. There is a promise from Domenic Dinicola about this called 'getOriginals' where the answer to that could be 'yes' but it is not very ergonomic and really about being useful to tooling.  It's pretty ugly, but it makes sense as output for tooling. 
        * SP: So right now is it fair to say anything about that proposal?
        * DE: Not really, except that it is being talked about by some Chrome people - it is very early.
        * GB: The one thing that is really nice about this proposal is that you can guarantee that these haven't been mutated.  This should lead to better optimizations in build tools
        * DE: there is a shallow guarantee, but not a deep one. Specifically the imported identifiers themselves cannot be modified, but members on them can be mutated.  `import resolve from ‘std:reflect’; resolve will be the same, but resolve.foo = true can change.
* Proposals to review
    * Additional module types (HTML, CSS, JSON, WebAssembly, built-in). CSS modules in particular seem like they could do with tooling feedback at this stage.
        * [https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1w8jWjD41htD7VxOejFqiHi6uGgHVWtZ_XmgFxgKkS7Q/edit#slide=id.p](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1w8jWjD41htD7VxOejFqiHi6uGgHVWtZ_XmgFxgKkS7Q/edit#slide=id.p)
        * [https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/759](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/759) (CSS Constructable Stylesheets/CSS modules)
        * [https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/02/constructable-stylesheets](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/02/constructable-stylesheets) (seems like this has been shipped by chrome [https://www.chromestatus.com/features/5394843094220800](https://www.chromestatus.com/features/5394843094220800))
        * DE:<presents the doc>
            * JSON - basically done
            * CSS Modules - The thing that is currently blocking CSS modules is that we're not entirely sure how we want to handle @import in here yet
            * Web Assembly - we're working on it
            * HTML modules - Microsoft is looking into them - there are a lot of questions from should they be allowed to include css/js in them, also whether those should be link'ed
            * Built in modules, we're working on that
            * SP: <presents a css in js fundamentals > [https://gist.github.com/threepointone/61e990b450712cfd7dd0bb87ed0c2982](https://gist.github.com/threepointone/61e990b450712cfd7dd0bb87ed0c2982) 
            * Proposal related to what sunil presented ('reference selectors') [https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/3714](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/3714)
* Next steps
    * Let's recruit more ecosystem stakeholders here -- type systems, linters, some bundlers seem un-represented
    * Dan to go on vacation for July and August; Guy and Brian to organize meetings. Any other co-organizer help is appreciated.
